National Curriculum Statements (NCS)

 Curriculum and Assessment
 Policy Statement

 GRADE 12 CAPS
 AMENDMENTS

ABRIDGED SECTION 4| ARTS SUBJECTS
 REVISED CAPS SECTION 4
 ARTS SUBJECTS

 GRADE 12

 AMENDMENTS

 Implementation Date:
 January 2021
 Contents
SECTION A: CAPS SECTION 4 AMENDMENTS

1. Introduction
2. Purpose
3. Conclusion

SECTION B: SUBJECT SPECIFIC AMENDMENTS

1. Dance Studies
2. Design Studies
3. Dramatic Arts
4. Music
5. Visual Arts

 4
 SECTION A: CAPS SECTION 4 AMENDMENTS
1. Introduction
The National Curriculum Statement, Grades R-12 was approved as National Policy and published in the Government
Gazette 34600, Notices 722 and 723 of 12 September 2011.

The National Curriculum Statement, Grades R-12 comprises:

• The Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for all approved subjects for Grades R-12;
• The National Policy Pertaining to the Programme and Promotion Requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R-12; and
• The National Protocol for Assessment.

A number of concerns were received from teachers, subject specialists, parents and education stakeholders about
the challenges in the implementation of the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS) in many
subjects across the grades with regards to:

• curriculum/assessment overload and poor curriculum coverage;
• poor quality of formal assessment tasks;
• lack of guidance on the use of cognitive levels;
• omissions on the forms of assessment; and weighting of assessment with regards to time and marks;
• the need to create more time for teaching and formative assessment;
• the number of tasks based on the need to make valid and reliable judgments about learning outcomes;
• shift from disconnected ‘tagged on’ assessments to credible assessment tasks;
• the nature of the subject and Grade used to determine the required number of assessment tasks; and
• to reduce dominance by any single type or mode, e.g.: Tests, Projects, Assignments, Case Studies,
 Simulations etc.

The Department of Basic Education has considered the concerns and has agreed to undertake a holistic review of
the CAPS documents to enhance the effectiveness of the curriculum. However, a curriculum strengthening process
is lengthy and includes strict policy processes. To urgently address the most pressing needs and provide interim
relief to teachers whilst supporting effective curriculum implementation, transitional arrangements have been
approved whilst allowing the rigorous process of strengthening the CAPS to take place.

The DBE developed an abridged version of Section 4 of the CAPS, focusing mainly on the reduction of formal
assessment tasks across most subjects.

2. Purpose
This document presents an abridged revised Section 4 of the CAPS for the Arts subjects. It specifically provides the
interim changes made to the programme of assessment for subjects in Grades 12, for implementation in January
2021.

The changes were made to relieve teachers from the burden of overload regarding the number of assessment tasks,
thus, improving the focus on teaching and learning. The revisions in some subjects also include guidance regarding
cognitive demands and types of assessment.

The reduction of tasks in the FET phase varies from subject to subject based on the individual nature of the subject.

3. Conclusion
The amendments contained in this booklet must be read in conjunction with the relevant Curriculum and Assessment
Policy Statements for the identified subjects in the FET Band.

 5
 SECTION B: SUBJECT SPECIFIC AMENDMENTS
1. DANCE STUDIES
1.1 Introduction
Assessment is a process of collecting, analysing and interpreting information to assist teachers, parents and other
stakeholders in making decisions about the progress of learners. The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12
is the formal curriculum in South African schools.
Classroom assessment should provide an indication of learner achievement in the most effective and efficient
manner by ensuring that adequate evidence of achievement is collected using various forms of assessment.
1.2 Types of assessment
Assessment should be both informal (assessment for learning) and formal (assessment of learning). In both cases it
is important that learners know what knowledge and skills are being assessed and that regular feedback be provided
to learners to enhance the learning experience.
1.2.1 Informal or daily assessment
Informal (assessment for learning) or daily assessment is the monitoring and enhancing of learners’ progress. This
is done through teacher observation and the teacher-learner interactions, which may be initiated by either teachers
or learners.
Informal assessment may be as simple as pausing during the lesson to observe learners, or to discuss with them
how learning is progressing. Informal assessment should be used to provide feedback to the learners and to inform
planning for teaching, but need not be recorded. It should not be seen as separate from learning activities taking
place in the classroom. Learners or teachers can mark these assessment tasks.
Self-assessment and peer assessment actively involves learners in assessment. This is important, as it allows
learners to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily assessment
tasks are not formally recorded, unless the teacher wishes to do so. The results of daily assessment tasks are not
taken into account for promotion and certification purposes.
Examples of informal assessment include correction/comments during the dance class, presentations, orals,
debates, discussions, viewing and critically responding, learner reflections, journal entries, work book activities, etc.
1.2.2 Formal assessment
Formal assessment (assessment of learning) provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well
learners are progressing in a grade and in a particular subject. Teachers must ensure that the assessment criteria is
clear to the learners before the assessment process. This involves explaining to the learners which knowledge, skills,
attitudes and values will be assessed.
The forms of assessment used should be appropriate to the age and developmental level of the learners. The design
of these tasks should cover the content of the subject and include a variety of tasks designed to achieve these
objectives.
Feedback should be provided to the learners after assessment and could take the form of whole class discussion or
teacher-learner interaction.
Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, practical tasks, projects, oral presentations,
demonstrations, performances, evaluations, etc.

 6
 1.3 Annual programme of assessment
The annual programme of assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
throughout the year. There are five formal tasks for the year. These tasks comprise of:
 Task 1, 2 and 3 are School Based Assessments (SBA)
 Task 4 is a Performance Assessment Task (PAT)
 Task 5 is the end of year final examinations
Task 1, 2, 3 and 5 (both written and practical) must be included in the school examination timetables each term and
may not take place during teaching time.
The formal assessment requirements for Dance Studies are as follows:
GRADES 10 AND 11:
 One Performance Assessment Task (PAT) per year. This PAT is worth 20% of the final year mark.
 School Based Assessments (SBA) consisting of one written test (term 1), two evaluation tasks (term 1 & 3), one
 mid-year written control test and one mid-year practical control test (term 2) and one research task (term 3).
 The SBA is worth 60% of the final year mark.
 The final examination in term 4 includes a practical examination and a written examination. This is worth 20%
 of the final year mark.
 SBA 60 % PAT 20% FINAL EXAMINATIONS 20%

 GRADE 10 and 11 ANNUAL PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT FOR DANCE STUDIES
 SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT (SBA) FINAL EXAMINATION
 (Internal) (Internal)
 Term One Term Two Term Three Term Four
 TASK 1 TASK 2 TASK 3 TASK 5
 Written Test Paper 1 Research Task Paper 1
 25 Marks Mid-year Written 25 Marks Final Written Examination
 control test 100 Marks
 25 Marks
 5% 15% 10% 10%
 Paper 2
 Evaluation Task Evaluation Task Paper 2
 Mid-year Practical
 25 Marks 25 Marks Final Practical Examination
 control test
 100 Marks
 25 Marks
 5% 15% 10% 10%
 SBA: 100 marks = 60% (practical = 50% and written = 50%) FINAL 200 = 20 %
 TASK 4
 Performance Assessment Task (PAT)
 Practical Section = 50 Marks
 Process = 30 marks Term 2
 Product = 20 marks Term 3
 Written Section = 50 Marks
 Process = 30 marks Term 2
 Product = 20 marks Term 3
 100 Marks = 20%
 SBA 100 + PAT 100 + FINAL examinations 200 =Total 400 Marks

 7
 GRADE 12:
 One Performance Assessment Task (PAT) per year. This PAT is worth 25% of the final year mark.
 School Based Assessments (SBA) consisting of one written test, one written examination (trials), and two
 evaluation tasks. The SBA is worth 25% of the final year mark.
 The final external NSC examinations in terms 3 and 4 include a Paper 1 written examination and a Paper 2
 practical examination. These comprise 50% of the final year mark.
 SBA 25 % PAT 25% FINAL EXAMINATIONS 50%

 GRADE 12 ANNUAL PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT FOR DANCE STUDIES
 SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT (SBA) FINAL NSC EXAMINATIONS
 (Internal) (External)
 Term One Term Two Term Three
 TASK 1 TASK 2 TASK 3 Term Four
 Written Test NO Mid-year Written Trial Written Examination TASK 5
 25 Marks Examination 150 Marks Paper 1
 = (converted to 100 marks) Written Examination
 150 Marks
 (converted to 100 marks)
 20% 30% 50%
 Evaluation Task NO Mid-year Practical Evaluation Task: Mock Term 3
 25 Marks Examination practical examination Paper 2
 50 Marks Practical Examination
 100 marks
 15% 35% 50%
 SBA 100 Marks = 25%
 FINAL 200 = 50 %
 (Practical = 50% and Written = 50%)
 TASK 4
 Performance Assessment Task (PAT)
 Practical Section = 50 Marks
 Process = 30 marks Term 1
 Product = 20 marks Term 2
 Written Section = 50 Marks
 Process = 30 marks Term 1
 Product = 20 marks Term 2
 100 Marks = 25 %
 SBA 100 + PAT 100 + FINAL examinations 200 =Total 400 marks

4.3.1 Performance Assessment Task (PAT)
The Performance Assessment Task (PAT) consists of both theoretical and practical sections. The theory should be
integrated and applied within the practical.

The PAT serves to strengthen the higher order thinking and performing skills needed in the final practical and
written examinations.

 8
 Grade 10 PAT: Composition of a dance – term 2 and 3
 Practical Section = 50 Marks
  Process = 30 marks
  Product = 20 marks
 Written Section = 50 Marks
  Process = 30 marks
  Product = 20 marks

 Grade 11 PAT: Composition of a group dance – term 2 and 3
 Practical Section = 50 Marks
  Process = 30 marks
  Product = 20 marks
 Written Section = 50 Marks
  Process = 30 marks
  Product = 20 marks

 Grade 12 PAT: Composition of a group dance - term 1 and 2
 Practical Section = 50 Marks
  Process = 30 marks
  Product = 20 marks
 Written Section = 50 Marks
  Process = 30 marks
  Product = 20 marks

Grades 10 – 12 PAT
PRACTICAL SECTION:
Process: 30 marks could include
 Conceptualisation
 Social, cultural, global and environmental awareness and responsibility
 Improvisation
 Experimentation
 Rehearsal
 Collaboration and communication
 Critical thinking and problem solving
 Digital literacy
 Self-management and accountability
 Safe dance practice

Product: 20 marks could include
 Completed dance composition
 Intent/idea/theme
 Originality/creativity
 Choreographic structures and dance elements
 Production elements
 Music/accompaniment
 Movement vocabulary

 9
  Performance quality
 Symbolism
 Video/film

WRITTEN SECTION:
Process: 30 marks could include
 Research and investigation
 Reflection/evaluation of the process (group and self)
 Selection of dance, choreographic elements
 Plan, manage and complete particular tasks within specific time, space and resource constraints
 Language/ communication skills
 Reading and writing skills

Product: 20 marks could include
 Production planning
 Marketing
 One-page programme note
 Oral presentation
 Information, media and technology skills

4.3.2 Paper 1: Written tests and examinations
All written tests and examinations must cater for a range of cognitive levels, skills and abilities of learners, as shown
below:

 Cognitive levels Percentage of task

 Lower order:
 Blooms Taxonomy: knowledge and recall 30
 Thinking process: Factual and conceptual

 Middle order:
 Blooms taxonomy: comprehension and application 40
 Thinking process: Procedural

 Higher order:
 Blooms taxonomy: analysis, evaluation and creativity 30
 Thinking process: Metacognitive

4.3.3 Paper 2: Practical tests and examinations
The technical set class in each FET grade (10 – 12) must show progression in the year, as well as across the phase.
Tests and examinations should include the technical class work, a group or solo dance and an unseen improvisation.
The dance major must be developed over the three year period.

 10
 The final NSC practical examination in Grade 12 takes place between August and September. The examination
is internally set (following CAPS Section 3, term plans) and externally marked and moderated. (See National
Protocol for Assessment for injury and illness).

The Grade 10 final practical examination consists of:
1. A full technical set class choreographed by the teacher - 50 marks to include a warm up, weight bearing and
 non-weight bearing exercises, turns, jumps, and traveling combinations, the main principles and characteristics
 of the dance major with a focus on accurate dance technique.
2. A group dance of 1 – 2 minutes which could be in the dance major or a popular African indigenous dance for
 example but not limited to Gumboot, Pantsula, Riel/ Nama - stap, Kwaito, etc. 30 marks choreographed by the
 teacher or an African dance specialist and performed with appropriate music/accompaniment displaying dance
 and choreographic elements.
3. A solo or group unseen improvisation – 20 marks selected by the teacher using one of the ideas learners have
 explored in Topic 2 through the year.

The Grade 11 final practical examination consists of:
1. A full technical set class choreographed by the teacher - 50 marks demonstrating safe dance practice, an
 increasing range of movement from grade 10, increasingly complex combinations and attention to detail and
 showing the main principles, characteristics of the dance major with a focus on accurate dance technique and
 performance skills.
2. A group dance of 2 – 3 minutes which could be in the dance major or a traditional/classical/ ceremonial
 African indigenous dance for example but not limited to Domba, Ingoma, San Trance Dance, Reed Dance, etc.
 30 marks choreographed by the teacher or an African dance specialist and performed with appropriate
 music/accompaniment displaying dance and choreographic elements.
3. A solo or group unseen improvisation – 20 marks selected by the teacher using one of the ideas learners have
 explored in Topic 2 through the year.

The Grade 12 final external practical examination consists of:
1. A technical set class choreographed by the teacher of between 15 – 20 minutes – 50 marks. This is not a warm-
 up, but a summary of the technique learners have achieved in their dance major over the three year FET period
 showing the main principles and characteristics of the dance major and set at the highest level of complexity
 that the learners can manage. Learners may apply the dance and choreographic elements they have learnt in
 Topic 2 and the PAT to the technical set class. Examples could be: links, entrances and exits, direction changes,
 patterning, timing, groupings and formations, partnering, etc.
2. A choreographed set solo of 1–2 minutes in the dance major (not in a mix of styles) – 30 marks set by a
 professional choreographer, the dance teacher or an excerpt from a professional dance work set at the highest
 level of complexity that the learner can manage. The level of complexity/length/personalisation will influence
 the learner’s final result.
3. A solo or group unseen improvisation – 20 marks selected by the provincial examination panel.

 11
 All practical tests and examinations are to cater for a range of cognitive levels, as shown below:
 Content
 Concepts
 Skills & Competencies
 Values & Attitudes

 Cognitive levels Percentage of task

 Technical set class = 50 marks
 Lower order = 15 marks 30
 Recall of technical set class/exam etiquette and grooming

 Middle order = 20 marks
 Application of technique, principles and characteristics 40
 Fitness/complexity/presentation/reproduction of rhythms
 Awareness of others/self

 Higher order = 15 marks
 Performance and movement quality/complexity/attention to 30
 detail/creativity/commitment
 Solo or group dance = 30 marks
 Lower order = 8 marks 30
 Recall of solo or group dance/beginning and ending

 Middle order = 12 marks
 Application of technique, principles and characteristics
 Fitness/complexity/presentation/reproduction of rhythms 40
 Awareness of others/self

 Higher order = 8 marks
 Performance and movement quality/complexity/attention to 30
 detail/creativity/commitment
 Unseen improvisation = 20 marks
 Lower order = 6 marks 30
 Response to music/stimulus

 Middle order = 8 marks
 Interpretation of stimulus/music/use of dance elements 40
 Awareness of others/self

 High order = 6 marks 30
 Creativity/imagination/innovation/commitment

Groups of between four to six learners will be examined at a time. (If there are fewer than 4 learners they will
perform in a smaller group).

 12
 4.3.4 Evaluation tasks – Grades 10 – 12
GRADE 12 Task 3 Evaluation task: learners do a mock practical examination using the final examination mark sheet
and rubric. This would deepen learner understanding of the final practical examination requirements, and aid in
exam readiness. The evaluation task could also be performed for the public or grade 10 and 11 Dance Studies
learners prior to the final NSC examination.
Evaluation tasks are used by the teacher to provide constructive, critical feedback aimed at improving, skills,
knowledge, attitudes and values. Teachers should take the following into consideration when evaluating their
learners:
 Is the learner able to display the desired content, concepts, skills &competencies, values & attitudes?
 Is this consistent over time?
 Is the motivation self-motivated?
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
  Greeting of teacher, peers and  Commitment  Self-discipline
 appreciation  Use of space  Punctuality
  Respecting others and the  Class and exam etiquette  Preparedness
 dance space  Working safely with others  Responsibility
  Grooming  Working effectively as an  Commitment to others
  Applying of the code of conduct individual and with others as  Commitment to movement
  Working effectively as an members of a team  Stage conventions
 individual and with others as  Identifying and solving  Working effectively as an
 members of a team problems and making decisions individual and with others as
  Identifying and solving using critical and creative members of a team
 problems and making decisions thinking  Identifying and solving
 using critical and creative  Development and problems and making decisions
 thinking improvement using critical and creative
  Development and thinking
 improvement  Positively influencing peers
  Development and
 improvement

4.3.5 Research tasks – Grades 10 and 11
The grade 10 research task investigates South African dance companies and or artists. The grade 10 task is an
introduction to research and research methodologies with a focus on language skills.
The grade 11 research task investigates current South African dance works (other than the prescribed works).The
grade 11 task builds on basic research skills acquired in grade 10 with added focus on language skills.

 13
 The research task includes:
 Investigation
 Using multiple sources of information
 Extracting relevant information
 Formatting the information
 Referencing information
 Introduction and conclusion (the research should start with a question)
 Presentation (written/electronic/oral, etc.)

4.4 Recording and reporting
Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment
task. It indicates learner progress towards knowledge, skills, attitudes and values as prescribed in the Curriculum
and Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual
progression within a grade and his/her readiness to progress or be promoted to the next grade. Records of learner
performance are to be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners in the teaching and learning
process.

 14
 Calculating the weighting of term marks for the annual programme of assessment for Dance Studies
 Grade 10 and 11 weighting breakdown of marks
 Term 1 2 3 2 and 3 4
 Task TASK 1 TASK 2 TASK 3 TASK 4 TASK 5
 Area of Written Evaluation Mid- Mid- Research Evaluation Written Practical Written Practical
 assessment Test Task year year Task Task Section Section Exam Exam
 Topics Topic 1 Written Practical Topic 3 Topic 1,2 Topic 2 Topic 2 Topics Topics
 1,2,3 Test Test process process 1,2,3 1,2
 Topics Topics term 2 term 2
 1,2,3 1,2 product product
 term 3 term 3
 Mark 25 25 25 25 25 25 50 50 100 100
 Weighting 5% 5% 15% 15% 10% 10% 50% 50% 50% 50%
 Total SBA 100 marks = 60% PAT FINAL EXAM
 100 marks = 20% 200 marks =
 20%

 Grade 12 weighting breakdown of marks
 Term 1 2 3 1 and 2 3 4
 Task TASK 1 TASK 2 TASK 3 TASK 4 TASK 5
 Area of Written Evaluation Trials Evaluation Written Practical Paper 2 Paper 1
 assessment Test Task Written Task: mock Section Section
 Topics Topic 1 Exam practical Topic 2 Topic 2 Practical Written
 1,2,3 Topics examination process process Exam Exam
 1,2,3 Topic 1,2 term 1 term 1
 product product
 term 2 term 2
Mark 25 25 150 50 50 50 100 150
 convert convert to
 to 100
 100
Weighting 20% 15% 30% 35% 50% 50% 50% 50%
Total PAT EXTERNAL NSC FINAL
 SBA 100 marks = 25% 100 marks = EXAM
 25% 200 marks = 50%

Codes and percentages for recording and reporting

 Rating code Description of competence Percentage

 7 Outstanding achievement 80 – 100

 6 Meritorious achievement 70 – 79

 5 Substantial achievement 60 – 69

 4 Adequate achievement 50 – 59

 3 Moderate achievement 40 – 49

 2 Elementary achievement 30 – 39

 1 Not achieved 0 – 29

Marks are recorded on a recording sheet; and percentages and codes are reflected on the learners’ report cards.

 15
 4.5 Moderation of assessment
Moderation is the process that ensures assessment is fair, valid and reliable. Moderation is implemented at school,
district, provincial and national levels for both the written and practical components. Comprehensive and
appropriate moderation practices assure quality of all subject assessments.
Moderation in Dance Studies includes internal moderation by the school as well as external face-to-face and cluster
moderation.
All practical examinations and performance assessment tasks (PATS) are to be filmed and made available.

4.5.1 Formal assessment (SBA)
 Grades 10 and 11 tasks are moderated internally. Provincial officials moderate a sample of these tasks online,
 during school visits, or cluster meetings to verify the standard of the internal moderation.
 Grade 12 tasks are moderated internally and externally – online, face-to-face or cluster- by a lead teacher or
 provincial official. The provincial education departments manage the face-to-face and cluster moderation
 process.

4.5.2 Performance Assessment Tasks (PAT)
Grades 10 and 11 PATs are sample moderated by the provincial officials. All documentation to be available for the
official visit where samples are selected by the official.
Grade 12 PAT is online, face-to-face moderated by a peer teacher and/or a provincial official.

4.5.3 Final NSC practical external examinations (Grade 12)
Provincial examination departments appoint an external marking panel of a minimum of three markers to include:
 Provincial internal moderator – Subject Advisor/ Senior Curriculum Planner/ DBE appointed official
 Provincial chief marker – lead teachers
 Marker(s) – lead teachers/teachers (to include at least one expert in the relevant dance major)

Practical final examinations are conducted between August and September. The maximum duration for the entire
practical dance examination process is 6 weeks in term 3.
Provinces make the arrangements regarding the practical NSC final examinations for Grade 12. This includes:
 Compilation of an examination time-table
 Communication with the teachers and schools
 Organisation of the venues and times
 Appointment and training of the marking panel

The provincial internal moderator/subject advisor/senior curriculum planner will visit examination sites during the
examinations in order to assure the quality, validity and fairness of the examination process.
Teachers are expected to be present with the markers to facilitate and conduct the examination and present their
practical year marks (SBA) for moderation. The marks are availed at the end of the examination process and
teachers then have the opportunity to engage in the fairness/validity of these marks. The examinations are filmed
in the event of remarking.

 16
 4.6 General
This document should be read in conjunction with:
4.6.1 National Examination Guidelines
4.6.2 National Performance Assessment Task (PAT) Guidelines
4.6.3 National Policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12
4.6.4 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12
4.6.4 Revised CAPS Chapter 4

 17
 2. DESIGN
4.1 Introduction
Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the
performance of learners, using various methods. This involves four steps:
· generating and collecting evidence of achievement;
· evaluating this evidence;
· recording the findings and
· using this information to understand and thereby assist the learner’s development in order to improve the
 process of learning and teaching.
Assessment involves activities that are undertaken throughout the year. In grades 10-12 assessment comprises two
different but related activities: informal daily assessment (assessment for learning) and formal assessment
(assessment of learning).

4.2 Informal or daily assessment
Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information regarding a learner’s achievement
that can be used to improve their learning.
Informal assessment is the daily monitoring of learners’ progress. Teachers need to facilitate and demonstrate the
design process from conceptualizing to the final product.
This can be done through questions and answers, short written activities completed during the lesson, open-book
tests, homework exercises, case studies, drawing activities, skill development activities (ex. ceramic work, sewing,
bead work, weaving, embroidery, computer skills, printing techniques), contact sessions, group discussion,
checklists, etc. It should not be seen as separate from the learning activities taking place in the classroom. Learners
or teachers can mark these assessment tasks. Self-assessment and peer assessment actively involve learners in
assessment. This is important as it allows learners to learn from and reflect on their own performance. Learners
should be able to acquire design specific skills and be able to showcase the progress and eventual result of the
acquired skill in his final product.
Informal assessment of Topic 2, during the term, must provide learners with the opportunity to make improvements
on their final products for the final PAT (retrospective exhibition) assessment. Teachers are expected to provide
verbal and written feedback to learners. This is particularly important if barriers to learning or poor levels of
participation are encountered.
The focus of the informal assessment should be on quality assurance of the PAT task. The results of informal
assessment tasks are not taken into account for promotion and certification purposes.

Informal assessment activities must develop:
• Creativity
• Critical thinking
• Collaboration
• Communication
• Information literacy
• Media literacy
• Technology literacy
• Flexibility and adaptability
• Initiative and innovation
• Problem solving

 18
 • Awareness of design in business context
• Awareness of Social and Environmental issues
• Drawing skills
• Analytical skill (ability to analyse and critically discuss design works
• Skill in using various media and techniques, contemporary and indigenousness cultural techniques and media
 use.

4.3 Formal assessment
4.3.1 Formal Assessment Requirements
All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as formal
assessment. Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and
certification purposes. All formal assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance
and to ensure that appropriate standards are maintained.
Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a
grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include projects, oral presentations,
demonstrations, performances, retrospective exhibitions, tests, examinations and practical tasks. Formal
assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject.
The forms of assessment used should be appropriate to the age and the developmental level of the learners in the
grade. The assessment tasks should be carefully designed to cover the content of the subject. The design of these
tasks should therefore ensure that a variety of content is assessed. Objectives, topics and content in the subject
should be used to inform the planning and development of assessment tasks.

GRADE 10 and 11
Note: Refer to Section 4 of the CAPS
Annual Programme of Assessment
The formal Assessment Requirements for Design in Grades 10 and 11 are as follows:
 TWO practical projects (Task 2 & 4) – each consisting of Topic 1: Process (100) and Topic 2: The Product (100)
 must be completed in term 1 and term 2. Both practical projects are formally assessed by the teacher per term.
 The marks are recorded as follow:
 o Topic 1 (Design process) is recoded as part of the SBA mark.
 o Topic 2 (Design production) is recorded as part of the PAT mark and only reflected at the end of the year.
 The Design process (Topic 1) of the TWO practical projects (Task 2&4) together with THREE theory assessment
 tasks (task 1, 2 and 5) make up the total SBA mark. The SBA weighting is 60% of the year mark.
 THE END-OF-YEAR ASSESSMENT consist of THREE parts and make up the remaining 40% of the year mark:
 v A written theory paper (Paper 1), focusing on Topic 3.
 v A practical examination Paper (Paper 2), focusing on Topic 1 and 2.
 v The PAT which is presented in the form of an exhibition at the end of the year. The exhibition consists of
 the finished products (Topic 2) from the two practical projects completed during term 1 to term 3. The
 product (Topic 2) for the PAT exhibition is internally assessed in each term. The marks for the production of
 each of these products are recorded as part of the PAT mark in term 4. The mark for the PAT exhibition in
 term 4 covers the remainder of the mark.
 v In Grade 10 and 11 all assessment is internal.

 19
 THEORY – Tests and Examinations
As the theory has not been affected by the changes, please consult CAPS for all necessary information –
requirements, cognitive levels, etc.

TABLE OF ASSESSMENTS
 2021 ASSESSMENT DESIGN
 INTERNAL INTRNAL
 SBA PAT EXHIBITION PRACTICAL EXAM THEORY EXAM
 60% 20% 10% 10%
 100 Marks 100 Marks 100 Marks 100 Marks
 TOTAL 400 MARKS

GRADE 10 AND 11 ANNUAL PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT FOR DESIGN (2021)
SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT (Internal) 60%
150 Marks + 150 Marks + 50 Marks= 400 converted to 100 Marks (SBA) TERM 4
TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3
TASK 1 TASK 3 TASK 5 TASK 7.1
THEORY TEST THEORY TEST THEORY TEST END-OF-YEAR EXAM
50 Marks 50 Marks for 2021 50 Marks P1. THEORY EXAM
 100 Marks

TASK 2 TASK 4 TASK 7.2.1 TASK 7.2.2
PRACTICAL PROCESS PRACTICAL PROCESS END-OF-YEAR EXAM END-OF-YEAR EXAM
Topic 1 Topic 1 P2 PROCESS P2 PRODUCT
100 Marks 100 Marks (50) (50)

 TERM MARK: 150 TERM MARK: 150 TERM MARK: 50 EXAM MARK: 200
 TASK 6
 PRACTICAL ASSESSMENT TASK (PAT)
 (Continuous assessment from Term 1 – Term 3)
TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 PAT: EXHIBITION
PRODUCT 1 PRODUCT 2 PAT EXHIBITION
 100 MARKS
Topic 2 Topic 2 PROCESS
 Process & exhibition
100 Marks 100 Marks (assessed in term 4)
 (50)
 internally assessed Product 1
 + 2 (50)
 PAT TOTAL MARK: 100
100 Marks (SBA) + 100 Marks (PAT) + 200 Marks (EXAM) = 400 TOTAL Marks
SBA weighting = 60% / End-of-year weighting = 40%
 20
 PRACTICAL ASSESSMENT TASKS (Refer to Addendum A and B in CAPS document)
 In Grades 10 and 11 each learner must do one Practical in both terms 1 and 2.
 Each task should include both Topic 1 (Design process) and Topic 2 (Design production).
 The teacher will set the practical brief, taking in account the context of the school, resources and see that the
 task is developmental and ensure a progression of conceptualisation and skills. Teachers may decide on a broad
 theme for the annual practical work and then subdivide it into specific aspects of the theme, in other words
 one in term 1 and one in term 2. This should result in a more coherent body of work in the PAT exhibition.
 The Design teacher should guide and facilitate the creative process from start to finish.

TASK 7 PRACTICAL EXAMINATIONS
• This practical examination will be internally set by the teacher and would be similar to the briefs set for TASKS
 2 & 4.
• This practical task will take place over Term 3 (Conceptualisation) and Term 4 (The Artwork).

PAT (RETROSPECTIVE EXHIBITION)
At the end of Grades 10 and 11 learners must present a PAT exhibition of their work as part of their examination
mark. This exhibition shows substantial evidence of the learners' practical design development (concept,
innovation, process, technical skills, an understanding of design in a business context and applied theoretical
knowledge). The PAT is developed over a period of time during term 1, 2 and 3. The exhibition should be entirely
the learners’ own effort.
Learners must concentrate on / demonstrate their entrepreneurial skill and promote their own products
(merchandising). Design products and solutions must link to each other which should afford the viewer a much
broader overview of the learner abilities, and it should be an opportunity for the school and parent community to
view their work.

GRADE 12
The Formal Assessment Requirements for Design in Grade 12 are as follows:
7 formal assessment tasks must be completed per year.
• Task 1 – 5 will make up the SBA mark.
• Task 6: (PAT) Exhibition
• Task 7: End of Year examination
For Design, TWO practical projects must be completed in term 1 and term 2. Each consisting of (Topic 1, the process
and Topic 2, the production). Both practical projects are internally set and assessed by the teacher per term. The
marks are recorded as follow:
• Topic 1 (Design process) is recoded as part of the SBA mark.
• Topic 2 (Design production) is recorded as part of the PAT mark and only reflected at the end of the year.
SBA: The Design process (Topic 1) of the TWO practical projects together with THREE theory assessment tasks make
up the total SBA mark. The SBA weighting is 25% of the year mark.

 21
 THE END-OF-YEAR ASSESSMENT consist of THREE parts and make up the remaining 75% of the year mark:
• A written theory paper (P1), focusing on Topic 3.
• A practical examination Paper (P2), focusing on Topic 1 and 2.
• The PAT which is presented in the form of an exhibition at the end of the year. The exhibition consists of
 the finished products (Topic 2) from the two practical projects completed during term 1 to term 3. The
 products (Topic 2) for the PAT exhibition is internally assessed in each term. The marks for the production
 of each of these products is recorded as part of the PAT mark in term 4. The mark for the PAT exhibition in
 term 4 cover the remainder of the mark.
• the formal assessment (SBA) is internally set and marked but externally moderated.
• the end-of-year examination papers, theory (P1) and practical (P2) are externally set and marked.
• the final PAT exhibition will be externally marked and moderated.
Table 1A: Formal Assessment

 FORMAL ASSESSMENT DESIGN
 INTERNAL EXTERNAL
 SBA PAT EXHIBITION PRACTICAL EXAM THEORY EXAM
 25% 25% 25% 25%
 100 Marks 100 Marks 100 Marks 100 Marks
 TOTAL 400 MARKS
GRADE 12
 GRADE 12 FORMAL ASSESSMENT FOR DESIGN
 SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT (Internal) 25%
 150 Marks + 100 Marks + 100 Marks= 350 converted to 100 Marks (SBA) TERM 4
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3
 TASK 1 TASK 3 TASK 5 TASK 7.1
 THEORY TEST NO MID-YEAR THEORY EXAM NSC END-OF-YEAR EXAM
 50 Marks EXAMINATION FOR 100 Marks P1. THEORY EXAM
 2021 (Externally assessed)
 100 Marks

 TASK 7.2.1 TASK 7.2.2
 TASK 2 TASK 4
 NSC END-OF-YEAR EXAM NSC END-OF-YEAR EXAM
 PRACTICAL PROCESS PRACTICAL PROCESS
 P2 PROCESS P2 PRODUCT
 Topic 1 Topic 1
 (Externally assessed in Term 4) (Externally assessed)
 100 Marks 100 Marks
 (50) (50)

 TERM MARK: 150 TERM MARK: 100 TERM MARK: 100 NSC TOTAL MARK (200)
 TASK 6
 PRACTICAL ASSESSMENT TASK (PAT)
 (Continuous assessment from Term 1 – Term 3)
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 PAT: EXHIBITION
 PRODUCT 1 PRODUCT 2 PAT EXHIBITION 100 MARKS
 Topic 2 Topic 2 PROCESS Process & exhibition
 100 Marks 100 Marks (Externally assessed in term 4) (Externally assessed)
 (50)
 25% 25% Internally assessed Product 1 + 2
 (50)
 100 Marks (SBA) + 100 Marks (PAT) + 200 Marks (EXAM) = 400 TOTAL Marks
 22
 NB. The Practical Final Examination will run until the date written on examination brief. The PAT exhibitions will
be conducted according to Provincial programme as per its demographics.

WEIGHTING: GRADE 12

 ASSESSMENT COMPONENT ASSESSMENT TASK MARKS CONVERSION/MARKING

 PAT TASK 6 100 25%

 SBA TASKS 1,2,3,4,5 100 25%

 PAPER 1 TASK 7.1 (P1) 100 25%

 PAPER 2 TASK 7.2 (P2) 100 25%

4.3.2 Types of formal assessment for Design
PAT exhibition
At the end of Grade 10, 11 & 12 learners must present a PAT exhibition of their work as part of their examination
mark. This exhibition shows substantial evidence of the learners’ practical design development (concept,
innovation, process, technical skills, an understanding of design in a business context and applied theoretical
knowledge). The PAT is developed over a period of time during term 1, 2 and 3. The exhibition should be entirely
the learners’ own effort.
Learners must concentrate on / demonstrate their entrepreneurial skill and promote their own products
(merchandising). Design products and solutions must link to each other which should afford the viewer a much
broader overview of the learner abilities, and it should be an opportunity for the school and parent community to
view their work.
Examples of PAT exhibitions
Candidates may set up their exhibition in a form of a:
• Designer’s pitch when presenting his/her work to prospective clients
• Window display
• Advert or Promotion
• PowerPoint presentation
• Presenting new sustainable ideas and non-commercial solutions in an innovative way
• Innovatively present a proposed solution to a problem that has been identified
• Interpretive exhibition, a display which engages the viewer in a visual or physical conversation through the
 use of elements such as text, objects, videos or interactive display.
This exhibition should therefore be well planned in terms of its concept and presentation. The PAT exhibition
showcases further development of the products into a cohesive body of work that is seen in the context of an
exhibition environment.

Checklist for the exhibition:
For Grade 12 (Externally marked & moderated):
• One or two Grade 11 products to show development and progression.
• The two products (Topic 2) from Term 1 and Term 2 are compulsory.
• Assessed process books (Topic 1, Grade 11 & 12) of the exhibited artworks must be displayed for reference
 purposes.
• P2. Practical exam: Section A (process book) & Section B (product)

 23
 Presentation requirements:
• Schools must provide the space for the exhibition e.g. the school hall, Art/Design classroom, etc.
• Teachers should make learners aware of the importance of presenting their work and provide guidelines for
 a neat, professional exhibition.
• Learners must design/plan and assemble their own exhibition.
• If computers are necessary/needed to show digital work, learners must make sure that the computer works
 and that the teacher knows the passwords.
• This body of work will be assessed holistically.
• This could also be a digital exhibition if it suits the school and specific province’s needs and circumstances
 better.

Practical tasks for the PAT exhibition
Teachers may decide on a broad theme for the annual practical work and then subdivide it into specific aspects of
the theme, in other words one in term 1 and one in term 2. This should result in a more coherent body of work in
the PAT exhibition.
Each task should include both Topic 1 (Design process) and Topic 2 (Design production).
Marks for each Practical task should be allocated as follows:
Topic 1: The process (100 marks)
Topic 2: The product (100 marks)
Topic 1: Design Process (Process book).

(To be internally assessed and reported as part of SBA mark).
• Topic 1 would consist of a series of ‘building blocks’ (Step-by-step activities as part of the process work) given
 at consecutive times.
• Research assignments (Design in a Business Context)
It must be integrated with the practical assignment or brief as well as be seen as part of the process (topic 1). The
Business context research must have a direct link with each Practical Task. Learners are expected to conduct their
research on the product choice they have made.
 It should consist of:
 o Business context topic and introduction;
 o content 4 – 8 both sides of an A4 page;
 o a conclusion;
 o a detailed bibliography (e.g. Title underlined; author/s in brackets; publisher; publishing date; web link,
 blog + date, etc.)
 o labels to accompany all visual material. (Title; materials used; name of designer; country in brackets;
 date).
• The content of this Business Context research in each Topic 1 task should include some or all the underneath
 content:
 o Define your target market. Explain why you have chosen it.
 o Discuss the trends that have influenced you.
 o An appropriate local or international case study
 o Visual Merchandising of your product
 o Explain how you would market this product. Create one of the following marketing forms: business
 card, flier, poster, advert for local newspaper, Facebook page, etc.
 o List all the materials you required, the name and contact details of your suppliers and write up the
 costs of all your materials. Also work out potential other costs such as electricity, etc.

 24
 o Possible competitors, describe their products and why you consider him / her / them to be
 competitors.
 o Research potential markets for your products.
 o Research potential funding options for your business.
 o Investigate tertiary and career opportunities in your design product choice: range, scope, training
 needed, and training available
 o How would you package and / or advertise your product or service to your intended target market?

Topic 2: Design Production.
• In Grades 10 and 11 each learner must complete one Practical project each in terms 1 and 2.
• In Grade 12 each learner must do one Practical project each in terms 1 and 2 to be exhibited on the PAT
 exhibition towards the end-of-the-year which will be externally assessed and moderated.
• Each product (Topic 2) completed per term must be internally assessed. Marks are to be recorded on the
 mark recording system per term, but not included as part of the SBA mark. This mark will be reported at the
 end-of the-year as part of the PAT mark.
• Learners have the opportunity to further develop and extend their practical work into a cohesive and holistic
 body of work that is seen in the context of a design exhibition environment. Therefore, learners may exhibit
 more works that provide evidence of this process e.g. work done on their own. (not more than 2)
• The Design teacher should guide and facilitate the creative process from start to finish.

A practical task should require the learner to...
• do planning/preparation/investigation/research to solve the identified problem;
• perform the task as per instructions (according to criteria given in the brief);
• produce a product(s);
• allow for innovation, experimentation and creativity.
• obtain new skills

To set a brief for the practical task, the teacher must...
• Identify a problem/need/opportunity that offers the learner a creative opportunity to design an aesthetically
 pleasing functional solution.
• Set clear criteria and give good instructions to guide the learner (the learner should know exactly what to do
 and what is expected). A Grade 10 brief will have more specific guidelines; while Grade 12 tasks should be
 open- ended briefs that allow learners to choose the materials, tools, techniques, themes and processes
 within their chosen practical design categories;
• Stipulate the format, medium/material, technique specifications.
• focus on inspiring creativity, originality and innovation;
• skill transfer should take place between teacher and learner
• learners should learn a new skill with every practical project
• ensure the task to be developmental with progression in skills;
• consider the contextual factors namely the materials, equipment, facilities at a school, resources and costs;
• Specify possible target market(s).
• keep the scope manageable;
• determine the time frame / duration / mini-due dates / final due date; (for monitoring purposes)
• use the available assessment rubric.
This brief should be discussed and debated by the teacher and learners for a better understanding of the intended
design outcome.

 25
 Choosing themes for the Practical tasks:
Teachers should choose themes to guide their briefs (e.g. If the theme is ‘Improved Living’, a brief could focus on
finding a variety of solutions to improve living). Teachers may develop their own themes and/or choose them from
the approved textbooks and previous Design question papers (P2).
Teachers may decide on a broad theme for the annual practical work and then subdivide them into specific briefs,
one per term.
The teacher should ensure that at least 60% of each Practical task is done in class under supervision, as the teacher
must authenticate the work as the learner’s own. If the teacher cannot authenticate the work, it should NOT be
marked.

 26
 The following taxonomy should be used in conjunction with the assessment criteria for the practical task (Term 1) and (Term 2) shown above.

 COGNITIVE LEVEL DESCRIPTORS FOR PRACTICAL PROJECTS

 EXAMPLE:

 WILLIAMS’ TAXONOMY
 WILLIAMS’ TAXONOMY: COGNITIVE (THINKING
 AFFECTIVE (FEELING)
 Fluency (the Flexibility (the Originality Elaboration (the Risk-taking Complexity Curiosity Imagination (the
 generation of ideas, generation of the expansion, enlargement, experimenting, the ability to create the ability ability to build
 answers, responses, alternatives ( generation of enrichment or trying new structure out of to wonder, mental pictures,
 possibilities to a and variations, new, unique embellishment of ideas challenges) chaos, to bring logical ponder, visualise possibilities
 given situation/ adaptations, different and novel to make it easier for order to a given contemplate or and new things or
 problem) ideas/ solutions/ responses/ others to understand or situation and/or to puzzle) to reach beyond
 options) solutions) make it more interesting) see the missing parts practical limits)
 The learner The learner was The learner The learner took the The learner The learner was able The learner The learner was
 generated many able to adapt and generated idea(s) much further, tried new ideas to fill in the missing looked at able to visualise
 ideas and many consider alternative creative adding enough detail through risky parts to make up a various options possible solutions,
 possible solutions to solutions or options solutions. for other people to experimentation. complete solution. and put in a lot even if not practically
 the problem/ brief. understand it. of thought. implementable.
27
 Tests
▪ A test for formal assessment should not comprise of a series of small tests but should cover a substantial
 amount of content taught and the duration should be 45 to 60 minutes.
▪ Each test and examination must cater for a range of cognitive levels. Determine mark distribution and
 compile a marking guideline.
▪ Do not only include lower cognitive level questions. Learners are required to write longer reflective answers,
 such as paragraph-type responses to a given scenario. Providing facts, substantiations, reasons, supporting
 evidence or arguments are essential.
▪ Analyzing unseen examples, learners must use appropriate design language in terms of function, material
 and aesthetics. Refrain from listing but substantiate and validate answers.
Examinations
Internally set examinations
• It is recommended that the same format as in the final Grade 12 end-of-year theory examination is used in
 Grades 10 and 11.
• Ensure that enough or more facts are included for each question on the memorandum in order to become a
 proper tool for marking and future teaching.
Questions should include unseen visual images to test learners’ design analysis skills. These images should relate to
different design categories, this can include projection of video clips
External Examinations
• All Grade 12 Design candidates will complete two external papers as prescribed:
 Paper Type of paper Duration Total Date Marking

 1 Theory 3 hours 100 October/November Externally

 Maximum 24
 2 Practical 100 July - October Externally
 hours
Paper 1: Design theory (Topic 3) - Grade 12
• MARKS: 100.
• TIME: THREE HOURS.

Guidelines
The National Education Department sets the written examination question paper on designated content taught
during the year. The examination format will comprise the following:
1. There are SIX questions in the paper, which must be answered.
2. There are choices within some questions in the paper. The options must be read carefully.
3. The paper is divided into THREE sections:
Section A: Design Literacy
Analysis of unseen examples
Communication through Design
Comparison between Local and International Design (unseen)
Comparison between Classical Architecture AND Modern OR Indigenous African Architecture. (This body of study
is compulsory)

 28
 Section B: History of Design
History of Design
Section C: Design in a Socio-cultural/ Environmental and Sustainable Context
Design and Socio-cultural Issues
Design and Environmental/Sustainable Issues

Additional information on the examination:
• The examination is assessed and moderated externally.
• The examination is assessed according to a national marking memorandum.
• Learners should be made aware of problematic terminology, social and environmental issues, personal
 assumptions and bias in relation to the designs/designers they study.
• Revision on previous question papers and memoranda is essential to assist learners in developing critical
 analyzing skills using appropriate design terminology.
• Teachers should use their own collection of project briefs, class notes, reference books, catalogues and
 magazines, photographs, slides, videos, etc., as valuable teaching and learning support material.
• Regular visits to contemporary exhibitions and design studios are strongly recommended. Where visits are
 impossible (e.g. schools in rural areas, etc.), newspaper reviews, the internet, the local environment, etc.,
 should be consulted regularly.
• Broad questions are set in which learners can apply their knowledge in a relevant way, justify their
 interpretations and opinions or be required to solve problems.

A summary of what Design learners will have to prepare for in Paper 1 is set out below:
• application of knowledge on unseen design products
• Sound knowledge of and the ability to apply the elements and principles (including universal principles,
 hierarchy) of design, as well as the stylistic characteristics of the various design movements
• Local designers:
• The study of one Indigenous African Craft
• 1 contemporary designer whose work is influenced by Indigenous African Craft
• 1 designer who considers environmental and sustainable issues in design
• International designers:
• 1 international designer who considers socio-cultural issues in design
• 1 international designer who consider environmental and sustainable issues in design
• Design History movements.

Ten key movements to study for Gr.12:
 o Arts and Crafts
 o Art Nouveau
 o Art Deco
 o De Stijl
 o Bauhaus
 o Modernism
 o Scandinavian
 o Pop Art
 o Post Modernism
 o Deconstructivism

 29
 • Discuss TWO movements/styles for the paper (at least 1 design and designer from each movement/style).
• Answer a comparative question based on TWO movements that were not assessed in the essay.
• Prior knowledge from Grade 10 and 11 is necessary to interpret and answer some of the questions.

Paper 2: Design Practical - Grade 12
Instructions and information:
The practical examination is set externally by DBE.
The theme will be a wide and open-ended theme to cater for diverse solution in the different specialisation
disciplines.
The examination question paper consists of Section A (Topic 1: 50 marks) and Section B (Topic 2: 50 marks).
The final Design practical examination for Grade 12 learners represents the culmination of their design skill and
knowledge throughout the year.

SECTION A: EXAMINATION PROCESS BOOK/WORKBOOK
(This may be completed at home and at school).
• The educator can guide the learners in their choice of subject matter and techniques used in Section A.
• The examination brief must be pasted into the examination process book.
• The learner must indicate his/her intentions/rationale/concept in this examination. This could be done
 through brainstorming, thumbnail sketches, a written essay, etc. [minimum of 1 page].
• Any form of direct copying/plagiarism or work that is not the candidate’s original work will be strictly
 penalized.
 It is the responsibility of the teacher to ensure that this does not happen.
• Learners must be encouraged to explore as many different interpretations as possible.
• Closely monitor and guide the learners as they do their process research and experimentation. It should be:
 o on the theme /context,
 o the actual product he/she wants to make (e.g. the current trends),
 o the material he/she is going to use,
 o how environment and/or social issues / impact on the product he/she is designing,
 o other Designers works, and not on the Designers themselves – the candidate should also indicate why
 the work interests him/her and what is it that influences him and what will he possible use that he
 seen in the Designer’s work – this could be for example his techniques, approach etc.
 o This research should be as visual as possible (e.g. mood boards) but annotated.
• Learners should be encouraged to take their own research photographs where relevant/possible.
• Learners’ process books must show evidence of preparatory sketches, annotated drawings and research,
 based on their various sources. It is important that they personalize these sources through drawing them and
 creating their original designs. (to avoid plagiarism)
• The learner must complete at least one tonal drawing, collage, maquette/preliminary model or a prototype
 of the final product
• Written/typed explanations, notes/ photographs must be submitted or must be pasted into the examination
 process book showing evidence of the learner’s processes and progress.
• As section A (the process) has the same weighting as section B (the final product), it should be given enough
 time equal to its importance.

 30
 • Consequently, learners should have enough time to do their preparation. The teacher can only be involved
 in this preliminary preparatory session. Due to the preparatory nature of topic 1, learners are allowed to
 complete work at home. (At least 60% should be done in the classroom.)

SECTION B: FINAL PRACTICAL TASK
(Maximum time: 24 hours.)
• The examination work must be done in the presence of the design teacher within the confines of the Art/
 design room. No examination work may be taken out of the classroom. This will be an examination
 irregularity. • This section (Topic 2) may NOT be done at home. Work must NOT leave the examination venue.
• Section B must be done on a continuous basis during contact time, for example, during four consecutive days
 of six hours each. Your choice of examination time options must be negotiated with your school.
• Learners are required to produce one design product in the DESIGN DISCIPLINE THAT THEY HAVE BEEN
 EXPOSED TO IN THE CURRENT ACADEMIC YEAR.
• The final design may be presented as a single product, or possibly in the form of a series of products
 addressing the same issue. E.g. different items for a ‘save water’ campaign.
• Learners’ work is not restricted regarding size, but it should be a substantial body of work representing a
 minimum of 12 hours or a maximum of 24 hours.
• Learners must demonstrate an advanced degree of technical skill in the use of a range of materials and
 techniques chosen.
• The final product should fulfil its function. The product solution should work in relation to the brief. The
 product should be presented professionally and neatly.
• The chief invigilator should make sure that strict examination conditions are adhered to during this
 examination session.

Cognitive Levels

• All tests and examinations must follow the following range of cognitive levels. Questions will have different
 degrees of challenges – lower, medium and higher order.
• As learners have a choice of questions in the trial and final examinations, each question in the choice should
 comply with the range of cognitive levels.

Cognitive weighting for formal assessment tasks

 Cognitive Level Percentage
 Lower order: knowledge 30
 Middle order: comprehension and application 40
 Higher order: analysis, evaluation and synthesis 30

 31
 Explanation of cognitive levels: Bloom’s Taxonomy

 KNOWLEDGE COMPREHENSION APPLICATION
 tell, list, write, find, describe, name, explain, interpret, discuss, distinguish, solve, show, use, illustrate,
 locate, identify, define et cetera. outline, validate et cetera. demonstrate, classify, substantiate,
 construct, examine, et cetera.
 ANALYSIS SYNTHESIS EVALUATION
 analyse, compare, investigate, create, invent, plan, predict, design, judge, decide, justify, debate,
 categorise, identify, explain, et cetera. propose, formulate, validate, recommend, substantiate, prioritise,
 substantiate, et cetera. argue, et cetera.

Bloom’s Revised Taxonomy

 Bloom’s Taxonomy Bloom’s Revised Taxonomy

 Evaluation – higher order Creating – higher order

 Synthesis – higher order Evaluating – higher order

 Analysis – middle order Analysing – middle order

 Application – middle order Applying – middle order

 Comprehension – middle order Understanding – middle order

 Knowledge – lower order Remembering – lower order

POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
4.4 Recording and reporting
Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment
task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in the Curriculum and
Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual
progression within a grade and his/her readiness to progress or being promoted to the next grade. Records of
learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners in the teaching and
learning process.
Reporting is the process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other
stakeholders. Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’
meetings, school visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, and class or school newsletters.
Teachers in all grades issue formal report cards quarterly. These reports cards reflect the percentages against each
subject.

 32
 The following rating scale applies for the quarterly reports:

 CODES AND PERCENTAGES FOR RECORDING AND REPORTING

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE

 7 Outstanding achievement 80 – 100

 6 Meritorious achievement 70 – 79

 5 Substantial achievement 60 – 69

 4 Adequate achievement 50 – 59

 3 Moderate achievement 40 – 49

 2 Elementary achievement 30 – 39

 1 Not achieved 0 – 29

Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages against the
subject on the learners’ report cards.

4.5 Moderation of assessment
4.5.1 Formal assessment (SBA)
Grade 12 tasks must be face moderated by the provincial subject advisor or appointed specialist. This process will
be managed by the provincial education department.
4.5.2 Practical assessment task (PAT exhibition)
• Marking must be done according to the DBE rubrics by a panel (peer teachers or external panel).
• All learners must be face moderated to verify the process, products and marks. This moderation must be
 done by Provincial officials and/or persons appointed by the province.
• The Provincial Education Department manages this process.
4.5.3 Final practical external examinations
• Marking must be done according to the DBE rubrics by a panel (peer teachers or external panel).
• All learners must be face moderated to verify the process, products and marks. This moderation must be
 done by Provincial officials and/or persons appointed by the province.
• The Provincial Education Department manages this process.

4.6 General
This document should be read in conjunction with:
 3.5.1 National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R-12; and
 3.5.2 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12.

 33
 ADDENDUM A: DESIGN CATEGORIES
Visual Communication/Information Design and Digital Design (include but are not limited to :)
• Illustration design
• Communication/information design
• Graphic advertising design
• Animation
• Digital design
• Film and video
Surface Design and Two-dimensional Craft Design (include but are not limited to :)
• Appliqué
• Beadwork
• Carpet / fibre design
• Embroidery
• Mosaics
• Mural design
• Stained glass
• Tapestry
• Textile design
• Wallpaper/gift wrap design
• Weaving
• Fashion
Product Design and Three-dimensional Craft Design: functional or decorative (include but are not limited to :)
• Basketry
• Beadwork
• Carving
• Ceramic design
• Constructed textiles
• Fashion and/or costume design
• Furniture design
• Industrial design
• Jewelry design
• Paperwork
• Puppetry design
• Tableware
• Weaving
• Wire work
Environmental Design (includes but is not limited to :)
• Architectural design
• Display and exhibition design
• Event design
• Interior design
• Theatre and set design

 34
 REQUIREMENTS FOR A CASE STUDY OF A DESIGNER, DESIGN GROUP OR DESIGN STUDIO
• Influences: immediate environment, identification of the consumer, and trends
• Style characteristics
• At least ONE example of design/product: identify the need/the brief from the client/intention of the end
 product, choice of materials/systems, design production and design processes
• Any impact of socio-cultural and/or environmental issues, if applicable, on the sustainability of the design or
 business
• Share the marketing strategy, if applicable
• Define how the success of the final product was measured
LTSM (subject to availability)
• Any design magazine, for example, House and Leisure, World of Interiors, Visi, Elle Deco, etc.
• Articles from websites, for example, DESIGN>MAGAZINE and DESIGN>EDUCATION, the online design
 publications
• Craft art in South Africa (Elbe Coetsee)
• Design basics (David A Lauer)
• Design culture now (Steven Skov Holt)
• Inspiring – a sourcebook – designers (Paul Rodgers)
• Meggs’ history of graphic design (Phillip B Meggs, et al.)
• Paperwork and more paperwork (Nancy Wiliams)
• Pepin Press, for books on packaging, construction, and textile and pattern design
• Taschen range of design books known as Taschen 25, for example, Signs, 1000 Chairs, Packaging design now!,
 1000 record covers, Design of the 20th century, Sixties designs, The world of ornaments, Architecture now!,
 Fashion: a history from the 18th to the 20th century, Art Nouveau, Indian style, Mexican style, etc.
• Textbooks approved by the National Department
• The new design source book (Penny Sparke et el.)
• Woolworths’ Making the difference through design daily resource book

ADDITIONAL BOOKS AND RESOURCES.

 Text Description Publisher/ site

 This is a great resource for
 Map , Mapping the design environmental and social Max Borka
 1
 world designers PDF document.

 Making the difference through Design recourse guide for Unitive between the Western Cape,
 2 design teachers. volume 1 and 2 Woolworth’s , Design Indaba and Sappi

 A web site on South African and
 3 Design Indaba International designers www.designindaba.com

 A web site on South African and
 4 Culture Trip International designers. www.theculturetrip.com

 Design MAGAZINE by Garth
 5 Ijusi Walker www.ijusi.com

 20th Century Design Web site with additional
 6 information on design history. www.widewalls.ch.com
 (Design History)

 Design Technology Web site with additional
 7 information on design history. www.designkmg.weebly.com
 (Design History)

 35
 LIST OF SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGNERS.
• The old Designers are still applicable, this is a list of contemporary designers that could be studied

 South African
 Categories / Type International Designer Categories / Type
 Designer

 Social designer Social and Environmental
 1 Luthando Mfabe graphic designer / illustrator 1 Stephan Augustin Designer

 Social Designer Karin Lidman Social and environmental
 2 Marianne Fassler Fashion Designer 2 Jani Pad designer.

 Social Design Social and environmental
 3 Raphael Clack graphic designer/ photographer 3 Ilia’s Diaz - Magic Lamp designer.

 Social designer Environmental designer
 4 David Tshabalala graphic designer / illustrator 4 John and Cynthia Hardy Architecture

 Social Designer Elham Seyed Javad - Social Designer
 5 Sifiso Shange Furniture Designer 5 ResportOn Fashion design

 Social Designer Environmental Designer
 6 Tsai Design Studio Architecture 6 Ada Weel Olsen Packaging Design

 Social Design Group Adidas & amsilk Environmental Designer
 7 Africa ignite crafts 7 Biodegradable Sneaker Fashion Design Group

 Ainhoa Garmendia Environmental Designer
 Social Design Group Tillandsia Usneoides, Furniture Design.
 8 PETA-LEE 8
 Crafts Living Harmock

 9 Ecobric Exchange Environmental Design Group 9 Karrie Hovey Environmental Designer

 Jiri Evenhuis and Janne Environmental Design
 10 Kyttanen Textile Design

 36
 ADDENDUM B: ASSESSMENT RUBRICS AND INSTRUMENTS
Descriptors for the assessment criteria for TOPICS 1 and 2

 Exceptional ability; richness; insightful; fluent; high skill; observation and knowledge powerfully
 Outstanding 90–100 expressed; supported by an original or unusual process and design solution. Outstanding and
 original presentation of the process and the product.

 Striking impact; most of the above; detailed; well organised and coherent; polished; skill
 Excellent 80–89 evident; supported by an original/unusual/relevant design process and solution; presentation
 original and considered. Some minor flaws evident.

 Well-organised, as above, but lacks the impact; good level of competence and selection of
 Very good 70–79 content; supported by a relevant design process and solution; obvious care and effort taken
 with original presentation. Some obvious inconsistencies/flaws evident.

 Interesting presentation; clear intent; convincing; simple direct use of chosen medium; displays
 understanding but tends towards the pedestrian and stereotyped response at times; adequate
 Good 60–69 design process and solution; reasonable effort taken with presentation. Distracting/Obvious
 inconsistencies.

 Adequate; feels mechanical; derivative or copied; little insight; unimaginative; design process
 Average 50–59 and solution not always clearly identified; fair presentation. Many distracting inconsistencies.

 Enough work to pass; not logically constructed: some flashes of insight; limited selection of
 Below information; poor technical skills might be a contributing factor; no real design process and
 40–49
 average solution; clumsy or careless presentation. In need of support/motivation to pass.

 Visually uninteresting; uncreative; limited/poor technical skill used; little attempt to present
 Weak 30–39 information in an acceptable manner; little or no design process and solution; general lack of
 commitment. In need of support/motivation to pass.

 Very little information or irrelevant work/design process and solution. No effort made to
 Very weak Fail 20–29 present work in an acceptable manner. General lack of commitment and technical skill.

 Unacceptable Incoherent; irrelevant, very little or no work; lack of even limited skills being applied. No
 Fail 0–19 commitment and technical skill.

Assessing learner’s ability to analyse and respond to examples of design (Topic 3):

 ACHIEVEMENT
 RATING CODE TOPIC 3: DESIGN IN CONTEXT

 Demonstrates exceptional ability to respond, articulate and analyse designs in relation to their cultural,
 social, political and historical contexts.
 7
 Shows outstanding ability in the use of appropriate design terminology.
 Outstanding
 Demonstrates extremely well-developed writing and research skills in the study of design.
 80-100%
 Shows exceptional insight; understanding and uses divergent approaches.

 Demonstrates a well-developed ability to respond and analyse designs in relation to their cultural, social,
 political and historical contexts.
 6
 Shows excellent ability in the use of appropriate design terminology.
 Meritorious
 Demonstrates highly developed writing and research skills in the study of design.
 70-79%
 Shows excellent insight and understanding.

 37
 Demonstrates substantial ability to respond to and analyse designs in relation to their cultural, social,
5 political and historical contexts.
 Shows substantial competence in the use of appropriate design terminology.
Substantial
 Demonstrates well-developed writing and research skills in the study of design.
60-69%
 Shows a good level of insight and understanding.

 Demonstrates moderate ability to respond to and analyse designs in relation to their cultural, social,
 political and historical contexts.
4
 Shows moderate competence in the use of appropriate design terminology.
Moderate
 Demonstrates competent writing and research skills in the study of design.
50-59%
 Shows a fair level of insight and understanding.

 Demonstrates adequate ability to respond to and analyse designs in relation to their cultural, social,
3 political and historical contexts.
Adequate Shows adequate competence in the use of appropriate design terminology.
40-49% Demonstrates adequate writing and research skills in the study of design.

 Demonstrates only basic ability to respond to and analyse designs in relation to their cultural, social,
2 political and historical contexts.
Elementary Shows little ability in the use of appropriate design terminology. Demonstrates basic writing and research
30-39% skills in the study of design.

 Demonstrates little or no ability to respond to and analyse designs in relation to their cultural, social,
1 political and historical contexts.
Not achieved Shows extremely limited ability in the use of appropriate design terminology. Demonstrates limited
0-29% writing and research skills in the study of design. Shows little or no understanding or insight.

 38
 RECOMMENDED MARKING INSTRUMENTS TO BE USED DURING THE ASSESSMENT OF PRACTICAL TASKS IN TERM
1 AND TERM 2
TOPIC 1: PROCESS ASSESSMENT INSTRUMENT

 CRITERIA DESCRIPTION MARKS
 (100)

 Concept Expression of intention and rationale/concept:
 development • Brainstorm or do a mind map of ideas to explore the theme and the intention of the
 brief.
 • Research the brief and find relevant source materials (visual references, designers/
 movements who inspired the learner, techniques, etc.). 20
 • Reference images linking/relating to the theme.
 • Develop a concept demonstrating critical thinking and creativity.
 • State Intention/rationale, validating the design solution found. How does your design
 contribute to the current issues and society?
 Exploration and Evidence of research, experimentation and reflection:
 experimentation • Show evidence of research by completing a few thumbnail sketches of ideas.
 • Design a few different solutions that explore the brief.
 • Evidence of experimentation, e.g. a mood board should be visible.
 • Exploration of different style movements.
 20
 • Exploration of different materials and techniques.
 • Application of different media and ideas can be combined where possible. (Creativity)
 • Continuous reflection of the process must be evident (Critical thinking).
 • Practice and improve your drawing technique and skill by re-drawing parts that you
 struggle with.
 Investigation Evidence of detailed planning, drawing skills and presentation
 • Generative drawings should explore a variety of solutions to the brief (different
 techniques and materials).
 • Generate something that is new, innovative and functional in global context. (critical
 thinking, problem solving skill, creativity, collaboration)
 • Drawing skills development must be evident. 20
 • Explore the use of elements of Art/Design in various ideas. (Use various lines, textures,
 forms, use of space (recession, foreground, mid and background, positive vs negative
 space), proportion, etc.).
 • This process should be creatively presented.
 • Other thoughts & ideas on how you might extend the project further?
 Evidence of final • Show evidence of the final design solution in the form of a detailed, annotated
 drawing/ collage/ • drawing/collage/maquette/prototype, etc.
 maquette related to • Photographs of your work in progress. 20
 the final concept

 Presentation • Overall impression of the body of work in the sourcebook, which includes planning,
 preparation and layout,
 • Clear sequence of the source book 10
 • Clearly labelled.

 Research: Design in Refer to the Research: Design in a business context assessment instrument
 a business context 10

 TOTAL 100

 39
 An example of the Design in a Business Context assessment instrument

 Mark Educator Mark Moderated Mark

 Research ability: being able to find the correct information for
 1 the required task. The expected content of the task is covered. 20

 Technical ability: contents page, introduction, body of the task,
 2 conclusion and bibliography 10

 3 The use of proper design Terminology and vocabulary 10

 4 Presentation/Layout 5

 5 Time management 5

 Total 50

 Convert the mark back to 10

TOPIC 2: THE DESIGN PROCUCT ASSESSMENT INSTRUMENT

 MARKS
 CRITERIA DESCRIPTION (100)

 Creativity/Originality/Interpretation Is the work unique, original and relevant to the brief? 20

 Overall impression. How have the elements and principles been used to
 Evidence of design involvement create a unique design solution? 20

 How technically competent is the final product? Is the craftsmanship
 Technique/Craftsmanship/Method adequate and professional? 20

 Evidence and utilization of available time to complete the product. Does
 Time management the design product show legitimate involvement in the making of the 20
 design product?

 Does the product fulfil its function? Is the product presented
 Professional presentation and professionally and neatly? Does the product solution work in relation to
 20
 functionality the brief

 TOTAL 100

 40
 ASSESSMENT OF THE PAT EXHIBITION - RETROSPECTIVE EXHIBITION MARKING INSTRUMENT
 1 Creativity/Originality/Interpretation in terms of the concept and solutions that are relevant to and the 10
 exhibition/presentation/design pitch:
 Is the work unique, original and relevant to the briefs? Does the exhibition/presentation/pitch sell the
 products? Does the products/concepts solve the problem?
 2 Evidence of design involvement: the appropriate use of design elements and principles: 10
 Evidence of design involvement in the exhibition/presentation/design pitch as a whole and each PAT.
 Evidence of detailed planning in the process book/s and appropriate use of design elements, principles and
 materials in presenting each PAT and the exhibition/presentation/design pitch. Overall impression. How
 have the elements and principles been used to create a unique design solution?
 3 Technique/Craftsmanship/Method: 10
 Overall impression. Technique / craftsmanship / method / competence showcased in each PAT as well as
 the exhibition as a whole. How technically competent is the final products and the
 exhibition/presentation/design pitch? Is the craftsmanship adequate and professional in the products?
 4 Time Management: 10
 Completion of ALL PATs / time management / evidence of design development in presenting a substantial,
 cohesive body of work. Evidence of and utilisation of available time to complete the
 exhibition/presentation/design pitch. Does the design exhibition/presentation/design pitch show
 legitimate involvementin the making of the design products?
 5 Professional presentation and functionality of design solution(s): 10
 Holistic, original and professional presentation of the Retrospective Exhibition. Are the products presented
 professionally and neatly? Do the products fulfil its function? Do the product solutions work in relation to
 the briefs?
 The exhibition showcases display materials that are relevant to the overall theme of the exhibition. Each
 PAT, together with the exhibition is presented with visual functionality and appeal to the viewer.
 EXHIBITION TOTAL 50

 41
 RUBRIC FOR ASSESSNING A RETROSPECTIVE EXHIBITION
42

 90% – 100% Outstanding creativity/ Outstanding Outstanding Outstanding, original and
 originality/ interpretation technique/ management/evidence professional presentation of the
 1. Outstanding ability that shows richness, insightfulness and
 in terms of the concept and craftsmanship/ of progressive design Retrospective Exhibition. The
 a fluent exhibition. High skill, observation and knowledge are
 solutions relevant to all the PATs. method/ development in exhibition showcases display
 powerfully expressed by showcasing outstanding, original
 Evidence of design involvement competence presenting a substantial, materials that are relevant
 design solutions into a cohesive body of work.
 in each PAT. Evidence of detailed showcased in cohesive body of work. to the overall theme of the
 planning and appropriate use of each PAT as well The exhibition reads exhibition. Each PAT, together
 design elements, principles and as in presenting as an outstanding, with the exhibition is presented
 materials in presenting each PAT. the exhibition. cohesive body of work. with outstanding visual
 ALL PATs are complete. functionality and appeal to the
 viewer.
 80% – 89% Excellent creativity/ originality/ Excellent Excellent management/ Professional presentation and
 interpretation in terms of the technique/ evidence of progressive functionality of the exhibition to
 2. Excellent, Striking, impactful body of work that shows most
 concept and solutions relevant craftsmanship/ design development in the viewer. The exhibition reads
 of the above with some minor flaws evident. Well-organized,
 to the PATs. Evidence of design method/ presenting a substantial, as a cohesive body of work with
 detailed and coherent body of work that is polished with skill
 involvement in each PAT. competence cohesive body of work. little inconsistency. Excellent
 that is evident. The exhibition supported by an original/
 Evidence of detailed planning used in ALL PATs are complete. and original presentation of the
 unusual/relevant design solutions.
 and appropriate use of design presenting the Retrospective Exhibition.
 elements, exhibition.
 principles and materials in
 presenting each PAT.
 70% – 79% Very good creativity/originality/ Very good Very good Good presentation and
 interpretation in terms of the Technique/ management/evidence functionality of the exhibition
 3. Very Good Well-organised, as above, but lacks the impact.
 concept and solutions relevant Craftsmanship/ of progressive design to the viewer. The exhibition
 Some obvious inconsistencies/ flaws evident that shows:
 to the PATs. Less intense design Method/ development in reads as a good body of work.
 Good level of competence and selection of content that is involvement in each PAT. Competence presenting a good, Good presentation of the
 supported by a relevant design processes and solutions. Evidence of detailed planning utilised in cohesive body of Retrospective Exhibition.
 Good organization and coherent body of work; skill is evident; and appropriate use of design presenting the work that has minor
 supported by an original/unusual/relevant design solutions; elements, principles and exhibition with inconsistencies.
 presentation original and considered. materials in presenting each PAT. flaws.
 ALL PATs are
 complete with some
 inconsistencies.
 60% – 69% Good creativity/ originality/ Adequate Good management/ Adequate design process
 interpretation in terms of technique/ evidence of progressive and solution that shows
 4. Good, Interesting presentation that shows clear intent that
 the concept and solutions craftsmanship/ design development in reasonable effort taken with the
 is convincing with simple design solutions. Distracting/Obvious
 relevant to the PATs. Lacks method/ presenting a cohesive presentation and functionality of
 inconsistencies. Adequate level of competence and selection
 design involvement in each PAT. competence body of work that has the exhibition to the viewer. The
 of content that is supported by a relevant design processes
 Evidence of detailed planning utilised in some inconsistencies. exhibition reads as an adequate
 and solutions. Obvious care and effort taken with adequate
 and appropriate use of design presenting the ALL PATs are body of work.
 presentation. Adequate organization and coherent body of
 elements, principles and exhibition with complete with a few
 work; skill is evident; supported by an original/unusual/relevant
 materials in presenting each PAT. flaws. inconsistencies.
 design solutions; presentation original and considered.
 50% – 59% Average creativity/ originality/ Satisfactory Average management/ Satisfactory design process
 interpretation in terms of technique/ evidence of progressive and solution that shows
 5. Average. Satisfactory presentation that feels mechanical,
 the concept and solutions craftsmanship/ design development in reasonable effort taken with the
 derivative or copied with little insight that is unimaginative. The
 relevant to the PATs. Lacks method/ presenting a satisfactory presentation and functionality of
 design process and solutions are not always clearly identified.
 design involvement in each competence body of work that has the exhibition to the viewer. The
 Satisfactory level of competence and selection of content.
 PAT. Evidence of planning and utilised in inconsistencies. ALL exhibition reads as a satisfactory
 Satisfactory organization and coherent body of work; skill is
 appropriate use of design presenting the PATs are complete with cohesive body of work.
 evident; supported by an original/unusual/relevant design
 elements, principles and exhibition with some inconsistencies.
 solutions; presentation original and considered.
 materials in presenting each PAT. some flaws.
 Many distracting inconsistencies.
 40% – 49% Lacks design involvement in Minimal Below average Minimal design process
 each PAT. Evidence of minimal technique/ management/evidence and solution that shows
 6 .Below Average, Clumsy or careless in presentation. The
 planning and use of design craftsmanship/ of design development minimal effort taken with the
 learner has done enough work to pass with an exhibition that
 elements, principles and method/ in presenting an presentation and functionality of
 is not logically constructed. The exhibition showcases some
 materials in presenting each PAT. competence average body of the exhibition to the viewer. The
 flashes of insight, limited selection of information, poor
 utilised in work that has many exhibition reads as a satisfactory
 technical skills with limited design processes and solutions.
 presenting the inconsistencies. PATs are body of work that shows
 Minimum level of competence and selection of content;
 exhibition that incomplete with major minimal effort.
 supported by a relevant design process and solution; little care
 shows flaws. inconsistencies.
 and effort taken with some presentation. In need of support/
 motivation to pass.
 30% – 39% Lacks design involvement in each Poor technique/ Weak management/ Limited design processes and
 PAT. Evidence of poor planning craftsmanship/ evidence of progressive solutions that show little care
 7. Weak Visually uninteresting presentation that is lacks
 and use of design elements, method/ design development in taken with the presentation and
 creativity with limited/poor technical skill. There is little
 principles and materials in competence presenting a poor body functionality of the exhibition
 attempt to present information in an acceptable manner with
 presenting each PAT. utilised in of work that has many to the viewer. The exhibition
 little or no design processes and solutions. It shows a general
 presenting the inconsistencies. PATs are showcases a poor body of work
 lack of commitment and skill. Poor level of competence and
 exhibition that incomplete with some that shows minimal effort.
 selection of content; supported by a weak design process and
 shows major work missing.
 solution; little care and effort taken for the exhibition. Poor
 flaws.
 organization and skill is evident; supported by poor design
 solutions; presentation is not well considered. In need of
 support/motivation to pass.
43
 3. DRAMATIC ARTS
SECTION 4
ASSESSMENT
4.1 Introduction
Assessment is a continuous, planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the
performance of learners using various methods of assessment. This involves four steps: generating and collecting
evidence of achievement; evaluating this evidence; recording the findings and using this information to understand
and thereby assisting the learner’s development in order to improve the process of learning and teaching.
Assessment involves activities that are undertaken incrementally throughout the year. In Grades 10 - 12 assessment
should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning). In both cases regular
feedback should be provided to learners to inform the continuous learning experience.

4.2 Informal and Daily Assessment
Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on a learner’s achievement to be
used to inform and improve their learning.
Informal assessment is the daily monitoring of learners’ progress. Examples of Informal Assessment are:
observations, discussions, debates, practical demonstrations, learner-educator conferences, informal classroom
interactions, questions and answers, short written activities completed during the learning process such as writing
in-role, creative writing, informal classroom performances, case studies, etc. Informal assessment may be as simple
as stopping during the learning process to observe learners or to discuss with learners how learning is progressing.
Informal assessment can be used to develop learners’ knowledge, skills and values, assess learners’ strengths and
weaknesses, provide additional support to learners, revisit or revise certain sections of the curriculum and motivate
and encourage learners. It should also be used to inform planning for teaching and learning, but need not be
recorded. It should not be seen as separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom. Learners or
educators may mark these Assessment Tasks.
Self-assessment and peer assessment actively involve learners in the assessment. This is important as it allows
learners to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily assessment tasks are
not formally recorded unless the educator wishes to do so. In such instances, a simple checklist may be used to
record this assessment. However, educators may use the learners’ performance in these assessment tasks to
provide verbal or written feedback to learners, the School Management Team and parents. This is particularly
important if barriers to learning or poor levels of participation are encountered.
The results of daily Assessment Tasks are not taken into account for promotion and certification purposes.
4.3 Assessment
All Assessment Tasks that make up a Formal Programme of Assessment for the year are regarded as Formal
Assessment. Formal Assessment Tasks are marked and formally recorded and reported on by the educator for
progression and certification purposes. All formal Assessment Tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of
quality assurance and to ensure that appropriate standards are maintained. Formal Assessment provides educators
with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a grade and in a particular subject.
Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, the Performance Assessment Tasks (PAT), which could
include essays, research tasks, journal writing, and performances. Formal Assessment Tasks form part of a
continuous yearlong formal Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject.

 44
 ANNUAL PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT- GRADE 12
 INTERNAL SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT – DURING THE YEAR EXTERNAL ASSESSMENT
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 Task 1: Task 2: Task 3:
 Performance Assessment Performance Assessment Performance Assessment
 Task (PAT) Task (PAT) Task (PAT)
 · Journal (25) · Research / Essay (25) · Essay / Research (25)
 · Performance (25) · Performance (25) · Performance (25)
 Task 4:
 Trial Examination
 September Task 7:
 Written Examination (150) End-of-Year Examination
 Written Examination (150)
 Task 5:
 Trial Examination
 Performance Examination
 (150)
 EXTERNAL ASSESSMENT
 Task 6:
 End-of-Year Examination
 Performance Examination
 (150

The forms of assessment used should be appropriate for the age and developmental level of the learner. The design
of these Assessment Tasks should collectively cover the entire CAPS Topics’ content, skills, knowledge and concepts
of the subject. The design of the Assessment Task should be varied and achieve the aims and objectives of the
subject.
Formal assessments must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners as shown below:

4.5 Annual Programme of Assessment
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread Formal Assessment Tasks, in all subjects in a school,
throughout the year.

4.5.1 Types of Formal Assessment for Dramatic Arts
PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT TASKS (PATs’)
There are three PATs for each grade. Each of these PATs consists of two sections:
• Performance Task
• Written Task

 45
 Performance Task:
 The focus of the Performance Task components of the PATs’ is to develop the practical application of knowledge,
 skills and values. It prepares the learners for the practical demands of the Performance Examinations in which
 learners are required to either do a Theme Programme, an Audition Programme or a Technical Theatre Programme.
 In each year the following is prescribed for the PATs’: every candidate must prepare three Dramatic Items. Two of
 the Dramatic Items must be text based, the third may, but does not have to be, vocal (choral verse) or Physical

 Theatre based. Note:
 1. At least one Dramatic Item should be a duologue or a scene.
 2. One Dramatic Item must be a South African Item.
 3. A variation of different Performance Forms, Genres, Dramatic Forms and Styles should be covered in the
 PATs’. 4. Dancing or singing will not be assessed. The subjects Dance Studies and Music cover those
 competencies.
 Only Text Based, Choral verse and Physical Theatre Items will be accepted.
 5. Physical Theatre is a specific Drama Discipline; it is not dancing
 6. Dramatic Items may not be self-written for candidates to perform in a PAT by learners, teachers etc.
 7. Dramatic Items that are selected must only be from Published Works.

 Educators should assess the three Performance Items of the three PATs’ at the end of each respective term. It is
 mandatory for all Performance Items to be video recorded. This evidence may be used to moderate the
 Performance Items during the year and especially for the FINAL EXAMS. This evidence will play an important role
 where marks are in dispute. Detailed feedback, to each learner, must be provided and monitored to ensure they
 implement the improvement points to the Dramatic Item in the next term.
 Educators must select which Dramatic Form, Genre, Style and/or technical aspects would be most suitable
 considering the context of the school, the learner’s development and the time of year.

• Dramatic Item examples for an Individual performance:

 Poetry, Monologue, Dramatised Prose, Popular Performance, Storytelling, Indigenous Performance, Public
 Speaking, Solo Mime, Solo Physical Theatre, Musical Theatre Performance, and others.

• Dramatic Item examples for a Physical-based (non-text) group performance:
 Movement, mime, dance drama, Physical Theatre

 • Dramatic Item examples Group performance using verbal and non-verbal communication:
 Scripted Plays, Choral Verse, Group Dramatised Prose, Narrative Presentation, Protest Theatre, Theatre in
 Education, Workers’ Theatre, Community Theatre, Indigenous Performance Forms, Storytelling

 • Technical aspects examples:
 Design of: set / Scenery, Properties / Props, Lighting, Sound, Costume, Make-Up, Special Effects, Puppetry, Masks,
 Production Schedules, Rehearsals, Stage Management Plans, Marketing Plans, Front-Of-House Procedures, Acting,
 Directing, Published Text, Management, Film Making and others.

 NOTE
 Candidates who decide to prepare for a Technical Theatre Option must from Grade 11 substitute the
 Dramatic Items of the Theme and Audition Programmes with the Technical Theatre Items from the Technical
 Theatre Programme. A candidate may not decide at the end of Grade 11 to select the Technical Theatre Option.
 Written Tasks:

 46
 The Written Task should include planning, preparation, implementation, reflection, recording and reporting. This
takes the form of a Journal, Research and Essay.

The aims of the written work are to:
1. Enable learners to work through a process of academic preparation for the Performance Task.
2. Deepen the importance of integrating theory and practice in the subject Dramatic Arts.
3. Develop writing and reflexive thinking skills. This is to prepare learners for the demands of the Written
 Examination.
4. Develop higher order thinking skills such as creative thinking (original and unique thinking), problem solving,
 entrepreneurial thinking, critical thinking and meta-cognitive thinking.
5. The above Annual Programme of Assessment reflects:
 • PAT 1 (Journal)
 • PAT 2 (Research- Term 2) and
 • PAT 3 (Essay- Term 3)
Due to different contexts in each Province teachers may swop the Research and Essay around.
See the table below for more detail on the Written Tasks
 PAT 1. Written Task PAT 2. Written Task PAT 3. Written Task

 JOURNAL RESEARCH ESSAY

 The Journal Task is an integrated The Research Task is an integrated reflection The Essay Task is an integrated
 reflection on the Performance Section on the Performance Section of PAT 2. reflection on the Performance
 of PAT 1. The Research Task is one single document. It Section of PAT 3.
 The Journal Task is one single commences in the 2nd term and learners work The Essay Task is a single
 document. It commences in the 1st term on it until the end of the 2nd term. document started at the
 and learners work on it until the end of Learners collect additional outside source beginning of the 3rd term and
 the 1st term. material to do independent research. learners work on it until the end
 This Journal Task has four outcomes: The educator must teach the learners the of the 3rd term.
 · It ensures recording, reflecting and elements and principles of Research writing. Learners use the theoretical
 improvement of the PAT 1. Make sure learners look at as many different support material (classroom
 · It develops Journal writing techniques sources as possible. The Internet is only one notes) given to them by the
 and Journal writing processes. option and is not always reliable. educator and apply the
 · It serves to record activities, work done At all times ensure ethical research is information in the form of an
 and thinking processes engaged in. conducted. Essay.
 · It serves as preparation for the · Research requires: The educator must teach the
 ongoing comprehensive Journal · Use of a variety of sources learners the elements and
 entries for the Performance · Comparing Contrasting principles of process- essay
 Examination Journal. · Highlighting writing.
 · Learners should focus on their own · Finding Ensure your essay follows the
 individual and journey in the · Presenting basic format of an essay:
 preparation of PAT 1. Use the Oxford reference system to Introduction
 Learners should follow the following acknowledge materials. Body of knowledge
 processes when you keep a journal: See the Standardisation Checklist for more Conclusion
 · Collect guidance. The final product must be in the
 · Analyse form of an argument.
 · Interpret See the Standardisation
 · Reflect Checklist for more guidance.
 · Present
 See the Standardisation Checklist for
 more guidance.

 47
 NOTE: THERE ARE TWO TYPES OF JOURNAL ENTRIES:
1. PAT Journal:
This Journal in Term 1 is towards reflection on the first PAT. Written and Performance Tasks and is completed at
the end of the 1st Term. Discussed in the 1st column above.
2. Performance Examination’s Journal:
This Journal is for the purpose of reflecting on the Performance Examinations process, skills and knowledge and
technique development. This is a continuous process:
• Grade 10 and 11 Terms 2, 3, 4
• Grade 12: Terms 2 and 3
• Marking, Recording and Reporting of the three PATs’

1. The three Written Tasks will count 25 marks each to add up to a TOTAL of 75 marks.
 1. Journal:
 Educators should formally assess, record and report on the Journal at the end of Term 1
 2. Research:
 Educators should formally assess, record and report on the Research at the end of Term 2
 3. Essay:
 Educators should formally assess, record and report on the Essay at the end of Term 3
2. The three Performance Tasks’ will count 25 marks each to add up to a TOTAL of 75 marks.
 1. Dramatic Item 1: (Group) e.g. Scene or Choral Verse
 Educators should formally assess, record and report on this Dramatic Item at the end of Term 1
 2. Dramatic Item 2: (Individual) e.g. Prose, Praise Poem, Monologue
 Educators should formally assess, record and report on this Dramatic Item at the end of Term 2
 3. Dramatic Item 3: (Group) e.g. Movement or Choral Verse
 Educators should formally assess, record and report on this Dramatic Item at the end of Term 3

FEEDBACK FOR IMPROVEMENT AND PREPARATION FOR THE FINAL EXTERNAL EXAMINATIONS:

The educator must provide regular detailed feedback to each learner on their Written Tasks and Performance Tasks.
The feedback from the educator must be based on the Criteria (skills, Knowledge and concepts) and the level
descriptors of each Dramatic Item or Written Section’s RUBRIC. Learners should reflect on the feedback given by
the educator and their own progress, in their Journal.

 48
 PERFORMANCE EXAMINATION THEME NUMBER OF DRAMATIC MARK
 GRADE AND AUDITION PROGRAMMES PAPERS ITEM ALLOCATION

 12 Trial Examination 1 1+1+ Links 150

 Final External End - of - Year National
 12 Examination 1 1+ 1 + 1+ Links 150

OR

 PERFORMANCE EXAMINATION THEME NUMBER OF DRAMATIC MARK
 GRADE AND AUDITION PROGRAMMES PAPERS ITEM ALLOCATION

 12 Trial Examination 1 First and Second 150
 Phase
 Final External End - of - Year National Third and
 12 Examination 1 Final Product 150

 NOTE: For these three examinations a candidate may select either one of the following Technical Theatre
 Programmes: Directing, Theatre Making, Stage Management, Film or Design (Costume, Lighting, Set or Make
 up). See the PAT documents and Examination Guidelines for specific guidance.

For more detailed information: Consult the Department of Basic Examination`s Dramatic Arts Performance
Assessment Tasks` Guidelines

WRITTEN EXAMINATIONS
Format for the examinations in Grade 12
1. The Written Examinations, during the year, must follow a similar structure to the Grade 12 External End of
 Year Examination. Through this, learners will have experience in writing a three-hour paper when challenged
 with the Grade 12 Final External Examinations. The questions in the written paper will assess the CAPS Annual
 Teaching Programme and the included Topics (Theoretical and Practical sections).
2. The prescribed play texts for grade 12; note the following:
Three play texts and their accompanying movement`s / genres will be examined e.g.
• 20th Century Dramatic Movements and its accompanying Play Text
• South African Theatre Pre-1994 and its accompanying Play Text
• South African Theatre Post 1994 and its accompanying Play Text
3. Educators have to prepare the learners to analyse, identify, understand and apply theoretical, theatrical and
 techniques of drama in every play text being taught, learnt and assessed:
• Theoretical: e.g. Sub-text, theme
• Theatrical elements e.g. blocking, lighting, set, costume etc.
• Techniques e.g. vocal, physical, acting etc.
4. Additional CAPS content that may also examined:
• CAPS Topics from Grades 10 and 11
• Theatre Practitioners e.g.: Grotowski, Stanislavski, Laban etc.
• South African Theatre e.g.: Workshop Theatre

 49
 Format of the Written Examinations in Grade 12
1. Learners will write one externally set and moderated written Examination Paper of three hours. The Written
 Paper will constitute 150 marks of the End-of-Year assessment mark in Grade 12. The questions in the paper
 will assess the CAPS Topics of grades 10,11 and 12.
2. The written Examination Paper could include the following:
• Long paragraph questions
• Contextual questions
• Paragraph and short questions based on personal development and experiences
• Reflexive thinking and application of Skill, Techniques, Concepts and Knowledge.
• The reflexive thinking is not merely an account of how the learner feels about Dramatic Arts (this is not
 marked). The account is of how the learner can identify skills, techniques etc. learnt, how they have
 implemented these, what are the function and purpose of these etc.

 GRADE WRITTEN EXAMINATION NUMBER OF PAPERS DURATION MARK ALLOCATION

 12 Trial Examination 1 3 hours 150

 12 Final External National Examination 1 3 hours 150

For more detailed information: Consult the Department of Basic Examination`s Dramatic Arts Examination
Guidelines

PERFORMANCE EXAMINATIONS
The Performance Examination has three Performance Examination Programme options available to learners, they
are:
1 Audition Programme
2 Technical Theatre Programme (Film Making, Directing, Stage Management, Theatre Making, Design (set,
 props, lighting, sound, costume etc.)
3 Theme Programme

AUDITION PROGRAMME:
1. This is a specialist option and only available to:
• Candidates who perform at an above average level
• Candidates who plan to pursue a career in Drama
2. This option is not available for candidates:
• Who struggle to perform in a group
• Who, for any reason, underperform in the subject
• However, in exceptional circumstances such as in the case of a learner with a barrier to learning, or a learner
 who have been ill for a long period, this option may be requested.
• NB: Specialist documentation must be made available to motivate for this option to be considered e.g.:
 medical certificates, document from the Provincial Department`s Examination section condoning certain
 concessions etc.
3. Permission to register candidates for the Audition Programme option is imperative and must be obtained
 from the Provincial / District Subject Specialist

 50
 PREPARATION AND PROCESS

 DRAMATIC ITEMS JOURNAL HARD COPY SCRIPT

 • A candidate must prepare three • This is an extension of the • Create a hard copy script of
 contrasting Dramatic Items (e.g.: poem, learner’s reflection on his/her all three Dramatic Items
 monologue, scene extract etc.) for his/her personal development which contained in the Audition
 Audition programme the learner started in the first Programme
 • At least one of these should be a South PATJournal • These Dramatic Items must
 African piece • Each candidate must continue be compiled in the running
 • All selected Dramatic Items must be from with entries in the Journal after order of the performance
 a published source, including items the first PAT-Journal entry is • This programme must be
 sourced from the internet completed. made available to the
 • The source must be acknowledged in the • The focus of the Journal entries examiner on the day of the
 hard copy script to be presented to the is now on the learner’s performance examination
 Examination panel progressive development with • Names and surnames of
 • No improvised, workshopped or self- all rehearsal and performance the candidates must be
 written items may be considered for the of Practical and Performance written on the hard copy
 examination Examinations. script, next to each
 • All Dramatic Items must be approved by • This Journal will be considered Dramatic Item that will be
 the teacher before a candidate starts in the case of a candidate, with performed.
 preparation valid reason, being unable to • In a case where a candidate
 • Each of these three Dramatic Items should perform the following will presents a Dramatic Item in
 represent a different Style or Genre, such apply: any language other than
 as indigenous drama, comedy, tragedy, • 150 marks will be awarded for the LOLT (Language of
 farce, commedia dell’ arte, Greek Theatre, continuous reflexive thinking Learning and Teaching) for
 Elizabethan Theatre, Theatre of the and writing of multiple entries performance, a verified
 Absurd, Epic Theatre, Post Modern about progressive translated version must be
 Theatre etc. Consider the candidate’s development with all rehearsal available in the language of
 strength, and preference in the decision and performance of Practical instruction: Dramatic Arts
 making. and Performance Examinations or Dramatiese
 See examples of Dramatic Items listed in this from: Kunste
 document under the heading, • Term 1-4 (Internal Grades 10 +
 PERFORMANCE/ 11)
 PRACTICAL COMPONENT of the PATs • Term 1-3 (External Grade 12)

PREPARATION AND PROCESS - continue
Candidates, facilitated by the educator, should do the following:
1. Base the preparation, design, creation and performance of the Audition Programme on the CAPS Topics
2. A t the start of the process, discuss the necessity and importance of keeping a continual development journal
 throughout the year. Also discuss the format this journal will take. The purpose is to keep a written record of
 both the preparation as well as the performance component of the Performance Examination. In the event
 of a candidate not being able to participate in the Performance Examination the educator and the examiner/
 moderator will use this written record to determine the candidate’s mark.
3. Educators must encourage the selection of material based on Indigenous Knowledge that reflects the
 diversity of all nationalities in South Africa.
4. Candidates may present a Dramatic Item in their mother tongue, if it is other than the LOLT e.g. French,
 IsiXhosa, IsiZulu, Portuguese etc. A verified translated version must be available in the language of
 instruction: Dramatic Arts or Dramatiese Kunste

 51
 5. Create suitable links between each of the Dramatic Items. For both the Audition and the Theme Programme
 the performance of the three Dramatic Items should be a continuous performance with only links between
 the Dramatic items and no breaks.
6. Rehearse the Dramatic Items towards a completed presentation of the performance.
7. Apply interpretative and performance skills to the selected Dramatic Items and to the respective dramatic
 forms unique to each of these Dramatic Items.
8. As soon as possible, secure a day and time for the Performance Examination that will be suitable for all
 stakeholders: candidates, educator, school and examiner/moderator/verifier.
9. The day, time and venue for the Performance Examination will be communicated by the area offices/region/
 district/provincial unit.
10. The duration of the programme must be approximately six minutes.
11. Technical elements are applied and integrated only when absolutely necessary and as required by the
 Dramatic Items and determined by the provincial guidelines/context. Note the focus of the Audition
 programme is not the use of lighting, sound, set, costumes or props. These elements are not part of the rubric
 and will not be included in the assessment. The focus is on the creativity and ingenuity of the candidate to
 work in their neutral black attire (T-shirt and track suits) and only the voice and the body as instruments. The
 design and application of e.g.: props, set, costumes are examined in the Technical Theatre Programme option.
12. Rehearse the Dramatic Items and the links into a final sustained performance.
13. Dress code: standard black attire (T-shirt and pants or skirt) should be worn. Only Dramatic Items that
 communicate an essential theme / characteristic of a character may use minimal and single costume pieces
 and or props. The flow of the programme must, not be hampered by costume changes.
14. Where applicable long hair must be tied back, away from the face.
15. For examination purposes: compile a completed script, and arrange the Dramatic Items in its finalised running
 order of the Dramatic Items, of the Audition programme

(B) TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME:

It should be noted:
1. Only teachers who are qualified in Film-making, Directing, Stage Management, Lighting, Design (costume,
 props, lighting, and sound) may offer this option as a choice for a candidate to do.
2. This programme is a specialised option. Only candidates who demonstrate exceptional technical potential
 and abilities may choose to do a Technical Theatre Programme.
3. It is imperative that permission is obtained from the Provincial / District Subject Specialist for candidates
 selecting this option and must be

 52
 TYPE PRE PRODUCTION PRODUCTION POST PRODUCTION
 Film The Pre-production phase is the planning process of every task before production Production phase begins ends The post production process begins
 begins once the footage is recorded. after all the footage has been capture
 □ Select a script (dramatic item) This process will capture all the □ Review the footage
 □ Analyse the script scenes and information from □ Create a paper edit
 □ Break down the script into scenes the pre-production process □ Familiarise yourself with the
 □ Brainstorm ideas □ Production meeting (script operations of the editing programme
 □ Create the final film script analysis, scene breakdown, □ Import picture and sound to editing
 □ Create and decide on the concept and your vision as a filmmaker storyboard, shots, schedules software on the computer
 □ Create the story board □ Finalise camera angles, □ Keep an editing log of edits / cuts /
 □ Cast the actors movements and shots etc
 □ Decide on and create the designs for the film (props / costume / set / lighting / etc □ Create a shot list □ Edit 1st rough draft footage
 □ Select props □ Create shooting schedule □ Edit sound/music/music/dialogue
 □ Select costume □ Prepare the location □ Export for viewing
 □ Select locations □ Set up the set □ Edit 2nd draft
 □ Finalise the crew □ Set up the shots □ Complete title sequence
 □ Finalise lighting ideas □ Rehearse the scene □ Complete credit list
 □ Finalise camera angles, movements and shots □ Shoot the scenes □ Edit final draft
 □ Create a shooting schedule □ Log footage □ Lock picture
 □ Obtain editing software App or programme Record and reflect on all above □ Output project to final format
 □ Understand the working of cell phone to record footage tasks in your Film Making □ Make copies
 Record and reflect on all above tasks in your Film Making Journal Journal □ Record and reflect on all above tasks
 in your Film Making Journal
 Stage Stage Managers Script with detailed notes and daily reminders/changes/tasks Setting up the stage: Presenting
 Management · Blocking · Floor plan marking Notebook
 · Cues · Lighting design Interview
 · Calls · Sound equipment set up
 · Entrances and exits · Props table layout
 · Props list per scene · Furniture set up
 All above must be covered and presented with artistic motivations included as well
 as an execution of the plan

 Directing Directors script and detailed analysis and notes on the: Directing a one act play of 5 Performance
 · Research minutes and not exceeding 10 Note Book
 · Concept: Artistic notes on genre, mood and theme minutes with artistic motivations Interview
 · Text analysis
 · Character analysis
 · Design (blocking, set and costumes)
 All above must be covered and presented with artistic motivations included as well
 as an execution of the plan
53
 54

 TYPE PRE PRODUCTION PRODUCTION POST PRODUCTION
 Design
 · Set, The first PAT requires the candidate to complete the whole process from selecting The second PAT requires the The THIRD PAT requires the candidate
 · Props a design element to producing a first product e.g.: set: candidate to complete the to complete the whole process
 · Costumes □ Select a script (dramatic item) whole process from selecting a from selecting a design element to
 · Sound □ Analyse the script design element to producing a producing a third and final product
 · Lights □ Research period, genre, given circumstances, characters, , stage space and social, second product e.g.: costume. e.g.: lighting: (note the lighting colours
 Note a minimum political, religious, economic, artistic, historical and theatrical contexts The two products must form an / effects can be applied with colouring
 of three designs □ Select and motivate the most appropriate stage pace integrated whole. in the set model and furniture or
 must be □ Create a breakdown and indicate where and how which design component will be □ Apply the research of the script through projecting a torch through
 presented) actualised / Dramatic Item, the period, colour gels. The three products must
 □ Identify the 3 design component and select the first one of three e.g.: genre, given circumstances, form an integrated whole.
 1.Set characters, stage space and □ Apply the research of the script /
 2.Costumes social, political, religious, Dramatic Item, the period, genre,
 3. Lighting economic, artistic, historical given circumstances, characters,
 □ Select and enroll the design support team and theatrical contexts for PAT stage space and social, political,
 □ Brainstorm ideas to PAT 2’s design component religious, economic, artistic,
 □ Apply design elements: Line, color, texture, form, space, movement, and shape to □ Use the PAT 1 script / Item historical and theatrical contexts for
 a the breakdown and identify the PAT 1 to PAT 3’s design component
 1. Ground plan style, type, period etc. of the □ Use the PAT 1 script / Item breakdown
 2. Scale drawing of the set costumes and identify the type, effects etc. of
 3. Miniature set □ Maintain or select another the lighting
 1 design team. Enroll the team □ Maintain or select another design
 Record and reflect on all above tasks in your Design Journal / Note book □ Brainstorm ideas team. Enroll the team
 □ Apply design elements: □ Brainstorm ideas
 Line, color, texture, form, □ Apply design elements: Line, color,
 movement, and shape to a texture, form, space, movement,
 the and shape to the
 · Drawings of the costumes o Set model and the costumes
 · Construct up to two
 costumes with recycled
 materials or available Record and reflect on all above tasks in
 clothes your Film Making Journal

 Record and reflect on all above
 tasks in your Film Making
 Journal
 PREPARATION AND PROCESS
Candidates, facilitated by the educator, should do the following:
1. Base the preparation, design, creation and execution of the Technical Theatre Programme on the CAPS
 Topics.
2. At the start of the process, discuss the necessity and importance of keeping a process script and note book
 throughout the year. The purpose is to keep a record of both the preparation and the performance
 component of the duties executed. In the event of a candidate not being able to participate in the
 performance examination, the educator and the examiner/moderator will use this written record to
 determine a mark for the learner
3. For all the options, only published material may be used.
4. The Director’s script and Storyboard, Stage Managers script and Designer source book must be presented to
 the examination panel.
5. For any of these options applied competence must be demonstrated.
6. For any of these options the panel will enquire what the creative process was and what type of thinking the
 candidate engaged in to motivate artistic choices.
7. The focus will be on the ingenuity and creativity of candidates in improvising around available resources with
 the aim to create an effective visual/aural environment, rather than on the sophistication of technical
 resources or the operation ability of a candidate of a lighting or sound system. e.g. a Cell phone camera can
 be used instead of a film camera etc.
8. Discuss performance rubric focusing on the assessment criteria such as design, stage management, film
 making and directing.
9. Candidates research a range of possible themes and select suitable published material.
10. The educator must secure and book a day and time on the Provincial Dramatic Arts Paper 2, Performance
 Examination Schedule.
11. This date should preferably be on the same day and at the same time as the other candidates’ audition and
 theme programmes. In cases where this is not possible the date must be arranged with the Provincial official
 responsible for the subject e.g.: Senior Education Specialist, Subject Advisor etc.
12. Book a venue for the external performance examination.
13. Ensure the final examination is conducive for the examination requirements. No audience may be allowed,
 except the examination panel. Allow approximately an hour for each candidate’s Final Examination.: With
 the candidate present: viewing of the one man show / short film etc., interview with questions set against
 the rubric, examiners discussion without the candidate present and awarding of the final marks.
14. In cases where the candidate selects an item in any language other than the LOLT, for the performance; the
 candidate must translate the text into the language of instruction: Dramatic Arts or Dramatiese Kunste. The
 educator must verify the accuracy of the translation.

 55
 (C) THEME PROGRAMME:
PREPARATION AND PROCESS

 DRAMATIC ITEMS JOURNAL HARD COPY PROGRAMME

 · A candidate must prepare three contrasting · This is an extension of the · Create a hard copy script of all
 Dramatic Items (e.g.: poem, monologue, scene Journal begun for PAT 1 to the Dramatic Items (including
 extract etc.) for his/her Audition programme further develop reflexive all the candidates of a specific
 · At least one of these should preferably be a South thinking and writing for the group)
 African piece Written and Performance · These Dramatic Items must be
 · All selected Dramatic Items must be from a Sections’ including reflection in the running order of the
 published source, including items sourced from on personal development of performance
 the internet the learner. · This programme must be made
 · The source must be acknowledged in the hard copy · Each candidate must keep a available to the examination
 script to be presented to the Examination panel Journal from the beginning of panel on the day of the
 · No improvised, workshopped or self-written items rehearsals from Term 1, to performance examination
 may be considered for the examination record their creative process, · The names and surnames of the
 · All Dramatic Items must be approved by the teacher choices and motivations as candidates must be written in
 before a candidate starts preparation well as the skills, knowledge the script, next to each
 · Each of these three Dramatic Items should and values development Dramatic Item that he/ she will
 represent a different Style or Genre, such as, but undergone during the perform.
 not limited to: preparation towards the · The original names of
 · Indigenous Drama, Paper 2: Practical Examination characters must be retained in
 · Comedy, · This Journal will be considered the scene extract.
 · Tragedy, in the case of a candidate · In a case where the candidate
 · Farce, being unable to perform selects a Dramatic Item in any
 · Commedia Dell’ Arte, · Candidate will be awarded a language other than the LOLT
 · Greek Theatre, mark out of 150 for a (Language of Learning and
 · Elizabethan Theatre, continuous reflexive thinking Teaching) for performance,
 · Theatre Of The Absurd, and writing of multiple entries the candidate a verified
 · Epic Theatre, about Topic 2: in preparation translated version must be
 · Post Modern Theatre etc. towards the Performance available in the language of
 Consider the candidate’s strength, and preference in Examination from Term 1-4 instruction: Dramatic Arts or
 the decision making. (Internal Grades 10 and 11) Dramatiese Kunste
 See examples of Dramatic Items listed in this and from Term 1-3 (External
 document under the heading, PERFORMANCE/ Grade 12)
 PRACTICAL COMPONENT of the PATs’.

PREPARATION AND PROCESS – continues
Candidates, facilitated by the educator, should:
1. Base the preparation, design, creation and performance of the Theme Programme on the CAPS Topics
2. At the start of the process, discuss the necessity and importance of keeping a journal. Discuss the format this
 journal will take. The purpose is to keep a written record of both the preparation and the performance
 component of the Performance Examination throughout the year. In the event of a candidate not being able
 to participate in the performance examination, the educator and the examination panel will use this written
 record to determine the learner’s mark.
3. Discuss the performance rubric.

 56
 4. Select three contrasting Dramatic Items for performance. (At least one of these should be a South African
 piece.) Each of these three Dramatic Items should represent a different Style or Genre, such as indigenous
 drama, comedy, tragedy, farce, commedia dell’ arte, Greek Theatre, Elizabethan Theatre, Theatre of the
 Absurd, Epic Theatre, Post Modern Theatre etc.
5. Consider the candidate’s strength, and preference in the decision making. See examples of Dramatic Items
 listed in this document under the heading, PERFORMANCE/PRACTICAL COMPONENT of the PATs’.
6. Educators must attempt to select material based on the Indigenous Knowledge that reflects the diversity of
 all the nationalities in South Africa.
7. Learners may present one Dramatic Item in their mother tongue, if its other than the LOLT e.g.: French,
 IsiXhosa, IsiZulu, Portuguese etc. A verified translation must be available in the language of instruction:
 Dramatic Arts or Dramatiese Kunste
8. Create suitable links between each of the Dramatic Items. The three Dramatic Items should be a continuous
 performance with links between the Dramatic items and no interruption.
9. Each candidate presents at least one individual and one group piece within their theme programme.
10. Each group brainstorms a range of possible themes and selects one final theme at the end of the process.
11. Research and select suitable drama pieces to support the theme.
12. Create suitable links to connect the pieces in a meaningful arrangement.
13. Where music is used for movement, it should be instrumental (without lyrics)
14. As soon as possible, secure a day and time for the performance examination that will be suitable for all
 stakeholders: candidates, educator, school and examination panel.
15. A group may not exceed 6 candidates. Time allocation per candidate is 6 minutes. (6 x 6 = 36 minutes)
16. Rehearse the items and the accompanying links (transitions) towards a cohesive polished performance.
17. Technical elements are applied and integrated only when absolutely necessary and as required by the
 Dramatic Items and determined by the provincial guidelines/context. Note the focus of the Theme
 programme is not the use of lighting, sound, set, costumes or props. These elements are not part of the rubric
 and will not be marked. The focus is on the creativity and ingenuity of the candidate to work in their neutral
 black attire (T-shirt and track suits) and only the voice and the body as instruments. The design and
 application of e.g.: a prop, set, costumes are examined in the Technical Theatre Programme option.
18. Dress code: standard black attire (T-shirt and pants or skirt) should be worn. Only Dramatic Items that
 communicate an essential theme / characteristic of a character may use minimal and single costume pieces
 and or props. For example, Grotowski multi-purpose use of props as representation of a variety of functions,
 e.g. a scarf could become – a hat, rope, dress, gag, a hand sling, a bandage etc.
19. Where applicable, long hair should be tied back, away from the face. Candidates should not wear any
 jewellery.
20. Each candidate should have a different colour symbol (ribbon, piece of material etc.) worn visibly around the
 waist because this serves as identification for the examination panel.

 57
 21. Arrange the Dramatic Items and links in the appropriate running order.
22. In a case where the candidate selects an item in any language other than the LOLT (Language of Learning and
 Teaching) for performance, a verified translated version must be available in the language of instruction:
 Dramatic Arts or Dramatiese Kunste. The educator must ensure compliance.

THEME, AUDITION OR TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME: LOGISTICS
Performance and examination requirements
1. Prepare the performance venue (sweep floor, arrange chairs, tidy space to make it neat and presentable.
2. Provide the moderator with:
 • Table and chairs for examiners
 • Script of the entire programme
 • Comment sheet with the candidates’
 - names and surnames
 - colour code of each candidate
 - Internal performance mark allocated by the educator entered on marksheet
5. The final Paper 2 Performance Examination must be filmed in its entirety. A cell phone may be used. However,
 ensure the final footage is of a high quality to serve as evidence in the case of disputes and moderation having
 to be mediated.
6. This is a formal examination and no audience may attend.
7. Start on time.
8. Each group will perform their programmes to an examining panel.
9. When examining on the panel, educators must have knowledge of the following:
 • The three performance examinations’ process and procedures
 • The relevant rubric
 • The Dramatic Arts CAPS.
10. All prop and set items (for Audition or Technical Theatre Programme) need to be removed from the
 performance space on completion of each programme.

 58
 THEME, AUDITION OR TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME: NON – COMPLIANCE
1. In the case where candidates have not met the minimum requirements as stipulated for a Theme, Technical
 or Audition Programme the examiner will not award the full mark allocation e.g.:
 • Theme Programme or Audition Programme: if a candidate performs only two out of the three required
 Dramatic Items he/she will not qualify for the full mark allocation. The final mark awarded will not
 exceed 66 % (out of a 100%) or a 100 marks (out of 150 marks)
 • Technical Theatre programme: If a candidate does not submit all elements in the pre-production,
 production and post-production phases, he/she will not qualify for the full mark allocation. In
 extenuating circumstances (power outage, technical failure of equipment, natural disasters) the
 following would apply:
 o Planning with motivations as well as annotated diagrams and floor plans etc. will be
 considered in awarding of the final mark.
 o Physical setup of technical equipment as well as set and prop displays will also be
 considered.
2. The above is not applicable when a candidate has a valid reason for non-compliance as per the National
 Protocol of Assessment e.g.: hospitalisation with an original medical certificate presented

4.6 Cognition Explained
Bloom’s Taxonomy (Anderson and Krathwohl’s) 2000
The original Bloom’s Taxonomy is over 50 years old. The refined Bloom’s Taxonomy has been in use from 2000. The
difference in the updated version is in the useful and comprehensive additions of how the Taxonomy intersects
upon different types and levels of knowledge: factual, conceptual, procedural and metacognitive.

Thinking Process Levels/Complexity
• Factual Knowledge is knowledge that is basic to specific disciplines. This dimension refers to essential facts,
 terminology, details or elements learners must know or be familiar with in order to understand a discipline
 or solve a problem in it.

 59
 • Conceptual Knowledge is knowledge of classifications, principles, theories, models, or structures pertinent
 to a particular disciplinary area.
• Procedural Knowledge refers to information or knowledge that helps learners to do something specific to a
 discipline or subject. It also refers to methods of inquiry, very specific skills, techniques, and particular
 methodologies.
• Metacognitive Knowledge is the awareness of one’s own cognition and particular cognitive processes. It is
 strategic or reflective knowledge about how to go about solving problems, tasks, to include contextual and
 knowledge of self.
Other thinking skills that should be developed are critical thinking, problem solving and creative thinking. Educator
must ensure that both the Written and the Performance Assessment tasks develop all these Higher Order Thinking
skills.

Intersection:

 COGNITIVE LEVELS REMEMBER UNDERSTAND APPLY ANALYZE EVALUATE CREATE

 FACTUAL List Summarise Classify Order Rank Combine

 CONCEPTUAL Describe Interpret Experiment Explain Assess Plan

 PROCEDURAL Tabulate Predict Calculate Differentiate Conclude Compose

 META COGNITIVE Appropriate Use Execute Construct Achieve Action Actualise

Cognitive Processes (cognitive complexity) and Knowledge Dimensions (levels of difficulty)
Above is an illustration of intersections where cognitive processes impact the types of knowledge. Using a simple
cross grid or table like this one, activities and objectives are matched to the types of knowledge and to the cognitive
processes as required by a question. Educators use it to track which levels of cognition they are requiring from
learners, as well as which dimensions of knowledge.
Cognitive levels to be addressed

4.7 Recording and reporting
Recording is a process in which the educator documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific
Assessment Task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in the
Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS). Records of learner performance should provide evidence of
the learner’s conceptual progression within a grade and her/his readiness to progress or being promoted to the
next grade. Records of learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by educators and
learners in the teaching and learning process.

 60
 Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools and other stakeholders.
Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include, among others, report cards, parents’
meetings, school visitation days, parent-educator conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters.
Educators in all grades report in percentages against the subject. Seven levels of competence have been described
for each subject listed for Grades R - 12. The various achievement levels and their corresponding percentage bands
are as shown in the table below.

CODES AND PERCENTAGES FOR RECORDING AND REPORTING

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE
 7 Outstanding achievement 80 – 100
 6 Meritorious achievement 70 – 79
 5 Substantial achievement 60 – 69
 4 Adequate achievement 50 – 59
 3 Moderate achievement 40 – 49
 2 Elementary achievement 30 – 39
 1 Not achieved 0 – 29

Note: The seven-point scale should have clear descriptors that give detailed information for each level.
Educators will:
• Record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and
• Report in percentages against the subject on learners’ report cards.

4.7 Moderation of Assessment
Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the Assessment Tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation
should be implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate
moderation practices must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.
All Grade 10 and 11 tasks are internally moderated, while all Grade 12 tasks should be externally moderated. The
subject head for Dramatic Arts or head of department for Arts and Culture at the school will generally manage this
process.

Moderation Evidence
The Provincial Subject Advisor / Moderator should ensure the following moderation evidence is included in
moderation:
• Lesson Plans must be based on the CAPS
• Assessment Task Plans must be based on the Lesson Plans
• Learner Assessment Evidence must be based on the Assessment Task The moderation instrument must
 include the moderation of all the above.

Moderation Evidence Administration and Management
• This is the responsibility of the educator. Evidence is presented in the following format:
 o Educator File 1 for: Lesson Plans, Assessment Task Plans (Instructions, Assessment Grid/Content
 Framework and Rubrics) of Educator File 2 for: Learner Assessment
 Evidence and mark sheets

 61
 The above evidence must be presented for Internal Moderation at school level, External Moderation at District /
Provincial level and when required for External Moderation by DBE and or Umalusi.
• Evidence must be filed as per the running order of the CAPS for both :
 o The Annual Teaching Plan: Topics 1,2, 3, 4, etc. – chronological order o The Annual
 Programme of Assessment: Task 1, 2, 3, etc. – in chronological order Moderation
 should be conducted on three levels:
• School level:
 Formal Assessment Tasks should be submitted to the subject head for moderation before learners attempt
 the task. The educator’s planning and evidence of learner performance should be moderated once a term by
 the head of the subject or her/his delegate. In the absence of a specialist head at the school, the task should
 be moderated by specialist from cluster school.
• Cluster/district/region level:
 Educator Files and a sample of evidence of learner performance must be moderated once a term during the
 first three terms.
• Provincial/National level:
 Educator Files and a sample of evidence of learner assessment must be moderated once a year.
• Provincial protocol and procedures for the examination of Final Practical Examination
• Examination and Assessment Sub-directorate advertise, select and appoint a suitably qualified examination
 panel of subject specialists.
• The examination panel attends the national standardisation meeting.
• The examination time table is drawn up in consultation with educators.
• Once dates have been finalised no changes will be effected.

4.9 Annexure
Assessment Tools for the following National Standardisation of:
StandardisationTools
1. Journal
2. Essay
3. Research

Analytical Rubrics:
4. Journal
5. Essay
6. Research
7. Scene / Extract
8. Monologue
9. Physical Theatre / Movement
10. Poetry
11. Prose

Audition programme:
12. Audition Programme

Technical Theatre Programme:
13. Film Making
14. Design
15. Directing / Theatre making
16. Stage Management
17. Technical Theatre Programme Holistic Rubric

 62
 Theme Programme:
18. Theme Programme Analytical Rubric
19. Theme Programme Holistic Rubric

 STANDARDISATION JOURNAL (PAT and Performance Examination)

 1 INSTRUCTIONS or briefs from the educator for the journal entries must be:
 · Given to learners before journal entry (PAT 1 written component) The Performance Examination Journal is a
 continuation of multiple entries of all the practical components as the candidate prepares and perform in activities
 from all topics in CAPS.
 · Based on the Rubric criteria on what the learner should include in their journal
 · Based on the CAPS Topics Content: skills, knowledge and values, the PATs’ Written and Performance Sections as well
 as the Performance Examinations
 · Sensitive to gender, inclusivity, culture, class, race and religion
 2 KNOWLEDGE, skills and attitudes:
 · The knowledge (theory) and skills (practical application) components of the subject Dramatic Arts must be
 understood and applied in an integrated manner

 3 FORMAT of the journal:
 · PAT 1 entry: This is a one of task that will be marked at the end of term 1. The mark will be recorded as 1st PAT
 Journal.
 · Performance Examination entries: The journal is a book of continuous entries made during the whole year in
 preparation for the Performance Examinations.

 4 CONTENT of the journal:
 · The journal is used to record the classroom teaching, to reflect in a meaningful way on the learning and to provide
 proof of the incremental and continuous improvement and development of the learner
 · There are generally three ‘phases’ a learner engages with when he/she engages in journal entries:
 · Phase one: the learner records / paste in the Dramatic Item they are working on and comment on the skills,
 knowledge and values found in this item e.g.: poem, essay etc.
 · Phase two: the learner reflects on their achievement of skills, knowledge and values
 · Phase three: the learner will commit to what needs to improve for future performance items and writing
 · Integration of practical experiences and theoretical material should be evident in the journal
 · The purpose of the journal is to reflection on the learning already achieved and yet to be achieved
 · The entries must demonstrate a gradual and incremental creative process being explored as well as achievement of
 skills and knowledge
 · Dramatic Arts terminology should be used in the writing of the assignment.
 · Individual reflection and development of theoretical understanding through practical work, even in the case of group
 activity, should be evident in the journal
 · Specialised language, in the case of IKS, should be adhered to
 · The journal must be used as preparation towards both the PAT performance
 · The journal is an academic document and must contain critical, creative and problem solving thinking
 · The journal must also serve as a vehicle to improve language skills · Different types of writing must be
 included:
 · Factual (knowledge e.g.: Theatre History)
 · Descriptive (process knowledge through description e.g.: costume, sets etc.),
 · Analytical (analysis, e.g.: theme, character etc.),
 · Reflective (evaluation e.g.: own and peer critique),
 · Procedural (creative process e.g.: staging process), ·
 Annotated drawings,

 63
 5 MARKS AWARDED
 · See the Annual Programme of Assessment
 · Performance Assessment Task mark or the Performance Examination mark (the latter in the case of a learner being
 unable to perform)
 · Assessment rubric is given to learners as part of the brief or instruction
 · Marks are allocated according to the achievement of criteria reflected in the assessment rubric ·
 PAT 1: 25 marks awarded to the Written Section
 OR
 · Performance Examination: 150
 · A candidate will be awarded a mark out of 150 for a continuous reflexive thinking and writing of multiple entries
 about the preparation towards the Performance Examination from Term 1-4 (Internal Grades 10 and 11) and from
 Term 1-3 (External Grade 12)

STANDARDISATION RESEARCH

TEACHERS:
· Use these guidelines to ensure national standardisation of the Research
· Attach these guidelines to the Assessment Task Plan
· Use these guidelines to ensure the following is covered:

1 BRIEF WITH INSTRUCTIONS TO THE LEARNER
 · Provide a written brief with detailed instructions underpinned by a ‘learning-how-to-learn’ and a ‘learning-
 bydoing’ focus on how to deliver on the task. State the supporting conceptual scaffolding underpinned by a triple
 loop learning focus on the ‘what, why and how’ of the deliverables to be achieved and evidence to be generated.
 · Base the brief and instructions on the relevant CAPS Broad Topic and Topics taught to the learner
 · Use clear and unambiguous instruction; suitable terminology e.g. analyse/describe/ compare/evaluate/ predict/
 own opinion and what is the quality and quantity of evidence the learner has to generate for that command verb
 Clarify the:
 • Format, Purpose and Content
 • Sources available
 • Scope and limitations o Criteria against which the Written Task will be assessed. Refer to the rubric criteria
 with a focus on the high end of quality
 · Demonstrate sensitivity and respect for gender, inclusivity, culture, class, race and religion
 · Provide an exact, non-negotiable date for the deadline of submission of the Written Task.

2 FORMAT
 May be any of the following options:
 • Written presentation (i.e. research essay with introduction, main body of knowledge,
 • Conclusion/Summary). A minimum of ± 300 words which is approximately 2 pages
 • Oral presentation, substantiated by written material (notes, brainstorming, etc.), 3–5 minutes per learner
 • Forum discussion/debate and accompanying script (15 minutes per group of 5)
 • Media: Film clips/video/TV inserts/radio/newspaper clips: 3–5 minutes
 • PowerPoint presentations: 3–5 minutes per learner
 • Interviews and accompanying scripts (5 minutes per pair/group)
 • Models [of stage types, set designs, décor, props, costumes] with accompanying written evidence •
 Collage, mixed media or montage

 64
 3 PURPOSE AND CONTENT
 The Research should:
 • Integrate and conceptualise the classroom teaching of the CAPS Broad Topic(s) and Topic(s)
 • Reflect, in a meaningful manner, on the teaching and provides proof of the continuous development of the
 learner
 • Demonstrate the learner’s level of cognitive understanding and application of concepts (content, knowledge,
 skills and attitudes). By extension focus on not just providing a range of questions with cognitive levels of difficulty
 and complexity, but show, in a transparent way, to learners the ways of thinking and ‘Habits of Mind’ behind the
 construction of questions and their narrative.
 • Integrate practical experience and theoretical support material (exercises, activities, rehearsals classroom notes
 and other source material)
 • Use Dramatic Arts terminology (the language of drama) in all presentations
 • Adhere to and explain specialised language in the case of indigenous knowledge systems

4 SOURCES
 • Base the content of the Research on the CAPS Broad Topic(s) and their respective Topic(s)
 • Use, critically reflect on, and creatively apply the Textbook, Play Texts, classroom note and practical work
 • Investigate a wide variety of sources (interviews, field testing, human resources, books, newspapers, television,
 film, Internet, etc.)
 • Select and use a minimum of two sources (not more than one Internet source)
 • Reference all the sources investigated and used
 • Use the Oxford reference system
 • Do not plagiarise
 • Apply ethical use of sources including oral interviews from ethnographic studies and ‘insider views’ arising from
 indigenous knowledge systems.
 • Teachers investigate the Internet addresses and hard copy sources provided by the learners

 65
 STANDARDISATION ESSAY

EDUCATORS:
· Use these guidelines to ensure national standardisation of the Essay.
· Attach these guidelines to the Assessment Task Plan
· Use these guidelines to ensure the following is covered:

1 BRIEF WITH INSTRUCTIONS TO THE LEARNER
 · Provide a written brief with detailed instructions underpinned by a ‘learning-how-to-learn’ and a ‘learning-
 bydoing’ focus on how to deliver on the task. State the supporting conceptual scaffolding underpinned by a triple
 loop learning focus on the ‘what, why and how’ of the deliverables to be achieved and evidence to be generated.
 · Base the brief and instructions on the relevant CAPS Broad Topic and Topics taught to the learner
 · Use clear and unambiguous instructions; suitable terminology e.g. analyse/describe/compare/ evaluate/predict/
 own opinion and what is the quality and quantity of evidence the learner has to generate for that command verb
 · Ensure the essay Topic gives direction and guidelines to scaffold learner understanding and interpretation.
 · Clarify the:
 • Format
 • Purpose and content
 • Sources available
 • Scope and limitations o Criteria against which the Written Task will be assessed. Refer to the rubric criteria
 with a focus on the high end of quality
 · Demonstrate sensitivity and respect for gender, inclusivity, culture, class, race and religion
 · Provide an exact, non-negotiable date for the deadline of submission of the Essay

2 FORMAT
 • Should be a formal structure, e.g. write in paragraphs, use core ideas
 • Should consist of an Introduction, Main body of knowledge and a Conclusion/Summary
 • The length and weighting may be guided by the following: ± 1 page; approximately ± 250 words

3 PURPOSE AND CONTENT
 The Essay should:
 • Integrate and conceptualise the classroom teaching of the CAPS Broad Topic(s) and Topic(s)
 • Reflect in a meaningful manner, on classroom teaching and provide proof of the continuous development of the
 learner
 • Demonstrate the learner’s level of cognitive understanding and application of concepts (content, knowledge, skills
 and attitudes)
 • Integrate practical experience and theoretical support material (exercises, activities, rehearsals classroom notes
 and other source material)
 • Use Dramatic Arts terminology (the language of drama) in all written presentations
 • Adhere to, and explain, specialised language in the case of indigenous knowledge systems • Prepare learners
 for the Written Examination
4 SOURCES
 • Base the content of the essay on the CAPS Broad Topic(s) and their respective Topic(s)
 • Use, critically reflect on, and creatively apply the textbook, play texts, classroom notes and practical work

 66
 JOURNAL RUBRIC
LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
MARKS 0-29% 30-39% 40-59% 60-79% 80-100%
DESCRIPTORS NOT ACHIEVED MODERATELY ADEQUATE SUBSTANTIAL MERITORIUS
 ACHIEVED ACHIEVEMENT ACHIEVEMENT ACHIEVEMENT
Record Recording of Recording of skills, Recording of skills, Recording of skills, Recording of skills,
 skills, knowledge, knowledge, values, knowledge, values, knowledge, values, knowledge, values,
 values, techniques, techniques, techniques, techniques,
 techniques, exercises’ and exercises’ and exercises’ and exercises’ and
 exercises’ and dramatic/ dramatic/ dramatic/ theatrical dramatic/theatrical
 dramatic/ theatrical elements theatrical elements elements is elements is
 theatrical is limited is accurate without detailed, outstanding and
 elements lacks insight comprehensive displays a high
 detail and with insight degree of insight
 accuracy
Content Reflection lacks Reflection Reflection Reflection Reflection
Reflection critical thinking. demonstrates demonstrates a demonstrates high demonstrates an
 Superficial limited critical sufficient degree of degree of critical excellent degree of
 connections are thinking in critical thinking in thinking in applying, critical thinking in
 made with skills, applying, applying, analyzing, and/or applying, analyzing,
 knowledge, analyzing, and/ or analyzing, and/ or evaluating made and evaluating
 content and evaluating made evaluating made with skills, made with skills,
 concepts with skills, with skills, knowledge, content knowledge, content
 knowledge, knowledge, and concepts. and concepts
 content and content and Connections made Insightful and
 concepts Minimal concepts. through relevant
 connections made Connections made explanations, connections made
 through through inferences, and/or through contextual
 explanations, explanations, examples. explanations,
 inferences, and/or inferences, and/or inferences, and
 examples. examples. examples.
Personal Conveys Conveys limited Conveys evidence Conveys strong Conveys strong and
Growth inadequate evidence of of reflection on evidence of insightful evidence
 evidence of reflection on own own work. reflection on own of reflection on
 reflection on own work. Demonstrates work. own work.
 work. Personal Demonstrates less satisfactory Demonstrates Demonstrates
 growth and than adequate personal growth satisfactory significant personal
 awareness are personal growth and awareness personal growth growth and
 not evident and/ and awareness through some and awareness awareness of
 or demonstrates through few or inferences made, through some deeper meaning
 a neutral simplistic examples, insights, inferences made, through inferences
 experience with inferences made, and challenges. examples, insights, made, examples,
 negligible examples, insights, Some thought of and challenges. well developed
 personal impact. and/or challenges the future Some thought of insights, and
 Lacks enough that are not well implications of the future substantial depth in
 inferences, developed. current implications of perceptions and
 examples, Minimal thought of experience. current experience. challenges.
 personal insights the future Synthesizes current
 and challenges, implications of experience into
 and/or future current future implications.
 implications are experience.
 overlooked.

 67
 Thinking, Expresses few Expresses some Expresses most Expresses ideas, Expresses many
Inquiry and ideas, with ideas, supported ideas, supported supported by ideas, supported
exploration limited support by relevant by relevant relevant evidence effectively by
 with relevant evidence or evidence or or rationale Critical, relevant evidence
 evidence or rationales. rationale creative and or rationales.
 rationales. Critical, creative Critical, creative problem solving Critical, creative
 Critical, creative and problem and problem thinking is and problem
 and problem solving thinking is solving thinking is comprehensive and solving thinking is
 solving thinking is adequate comprehensive offers many insights highly developed
 limited and and offers many and offers creative
 simplistic insights insights

 68
 JOURNAL RUBRIC
LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
MARKS 0-29% 30-39% 40-59% 60-79% 80-100%
DESCRIPTORS NOT ACHIEVED MODERATELY ADEQUATE SUBSTANTIAL MERITORIUS
 ACHIEVED ACHIEVEMENT ACHIEVEMENT ACHIEVEMENT
Creative Content, Content, concepts, Content, Content, concepts, Content, concepts,
Application concepts, skills skills and concepts, skills skills and skills and
 and knowledge knowledge and knowledge knowledge knowledge
 (theatrical and (theatrical and (theatrical and (theatrical and (theatrical and
 dramatic), in dramatic), in dramatic), in dramatic), in dramatic), in
 relation to relation to relation to relation to planning relation to planning
 planning for planning for planning for for continuous for continuous
 continuous continuous continuous personal personal
 personal personal personal development, is development, , a
 development, is development, is development, is comprehensive highly insightful
 limited and adequate with comprehensive with a high level of understanding of
 simplistic some insight with insight insight the relationship
 between these
 components
ESSAY RUBRIC
CATEGORY MARK % LEVEL DESCRIPTORS
Outstanding 80-100 Well organised, comprehensive and coherent, polished structure. Supported by an
achievement exceptionally high level of competence. Able to process information into original interpretation
 and thoughtful selection of facts. Uses a variety of original and/or relevant dramatic references.
 Insightful, fluent, observation and knowledge powerfully expressed.
Meritorious 70-79 Well organised, detailed and coherent, polished structure. Supported by a high level of
achievement competence to process information with an original interpretation and careful selection of facts.
 Using original or unusual selection of relevant dramatic references. Shows insight, observation
 and knowledge well expressed.
Substantial 60-69 Organised, detailed, some level of competence, some slight flaws evident in structure.
achievement Interesting reading, clear statements, convincing, simple direct language. Supported by a
 selection of relevant dramatic references. Shows good grasp of the theme/task, some insightful
 statements. Obvious care and effort taken with presentation.
Adequate 50-59 Structure not always logical or organised, reasonable effort with presentation. Displays a basic
achievement understanding but tends towards mechanistic and stereotyped responses at times. Adequate
 selection of relevant ‘dramatic’ references. Adequate reading but appears memorised. Not
 always a high level of insight, sometimes unimaginative but has some ability to justify
 discussion.
Moderate 40-49 Not always organised or logically constructed. Not always enough information, some flashes of
achievement insight. Limited selection of information. Poor language skills. Argument lacks supporting
 discussion.
Elementary 30-39 Rambling – no structure, limited vocabulary, little attempt to present information in an
achievement acceptable manner. Very little information, jumbled, not easy to follow, often irrelevant. Poor
 language skills. Argument lacks supporting discussion.
Not achieved 0-29 Incoherent, very little work, limited skills. Irrelevant information provided, lacking any
 supporting discussion.

 69
 RESEARCH RUBRIC

 CATEGORY MARK % LEVEL DESCRIPTORS

 Well organised, comprehensive and coherent, polished structure. Supported by an
 exceptionally high level of competence. Able to process information into original interpretation
Outstanding
 80-100 and thoughtful selection of facts. Uses a variety of original and/or relevant dramatic references
achievement
 and/or film clips. Insightful, fluent, observation and knowledge powerfully expressed. If models
 or mixed media are used they are well executed and compliment the research.

 Well organised, detailed and coherent, polished structure. Supported by a high level of
 competence to process information with an original interpretation and careful selection of facts.
Meritorious
 70-79 Using original or unusual selection of relevant dramatic references and/or film clips. Shows
achievement
 insight, observation and knowledge well expressed. If models or mixed media are used they
 complement to the research.

 Organised, detailed, some level of competence, some slight flaws evident in structure.
 Interesting reading, clear statements, convincing, simple direct language. Supported by a
Substantial
 60-69 selection of relevant dramatic references and/or film clips. Shows good grasp of the theme/
achievement
 task, some insightful statements. Obvious care and effort taken with presentation. If models or
 mixed media are used they link to the research.

 Structure not always logical or organised, reasonable effort with presentation. Displays a basic
 understanding but tends towards mechanistic and stereotyped responses at times. Adequate
Adequate selection of relevant dramatic references and/or film. Adequate reading but appears
 50-59
achievement memorised. Not always a high level of insight, sometimes unimaginative but has some ability to
 justify discussion. If models or mixed media are used they are not always supported by the
 research.
 Not always organised or logically constructed. Not always enough information, some flashes of
Moderate insight. Limited selection of information. Poor language skills. Argument lacks supporting
 40-49
achievement discussion. Any models or mixed media used are not well executed or particularly relevant.

 Rambling – no structure, limited vocabulary, little attempt to present information in an
Elementary acceptable manner. Very little information, jumbled, not easy to follow, often irrelevant. Poor
 30-39 language skills. Argument lacks supporting discussion. Unlikely to have a supporting model, any
achievement
 mixed media will be poorly executed.

Not achieved Incoherent, very little work, limited skills. Irrelevant information provided, lacking any
 0-29 supporting discussion.

 74

 70
 DRAMATIC ITEM SCENE / EXTRACT RUBRIC

MARKS 66-100% 30-65% 0-29%

CRITERIA ACHIEVED WITH MERIT ACHIEVED PARTIALLY ACHIEVED

 The learner knows the words of the The learner knows the words, The learner does not know
 scene and shows evidence of thought, but there is some evidence of the words of the scene and
Preparation planning and rehearsal. uncertainty or lack of does not show evidence of
 rehearsal. thought, planning and
 rehearsal.
 The learner demonstrates an There is evidence of some The learner demonstrates
 understanding of the scene as it stands understanding of the scene, little or no understanding of
 within the context of the play as a but certain aspects have been the scene as it stands within
 whole. S/he understands the basic overlooked, or this is not the context of the play as a
 dilemma/ conflict of the scene and the consistent throughout. There whole. S/he does not
Understanding
 characters and their motivations. may be a possible understand the basic
of scene
 misinterpretation on the basis dilemma/conflict of the
 of the given circumstances. scene, his/her character and
 their motivations. There is
 complete misinterpretation
 of the given circumstances.
 The learner demonstrates an The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 understanding of the elements of successful in creating and creating and sustaining vocal
 voice work and to communicate the sustaining vocal characterisation, or there is
 personality, background, class, age, characterisation, or there may vocal strain throughout the
 education and status of the speaker. be indications of vocal strain. performance. The vocal
 S/he is able to interpret a text, make Certain aspects of the characterisation is
Vocal appropriate choices for characterisation may be inappropriate for the
characterisation characterisation and use these chosen inappropriate for the particular character or
 characteristics without vocal strain. particular character or context.
 These characteristics may include context.
 pitch, intonation, range, rhythm,
 accent, tone and quality in order to
 successfully and appropriately convey
 the voice of their character.
 The learner is able to speak distinctly The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 and audibly. S/he is able to use the successful in speaking speaking distinctly and
Vocal clarity appropriate volume for a space, distinctly and audibly. There audibly. Volume can only be
 without vocal strain. are momentary lapses, or attained with vocal strain.
 there are moments of strain.

 The learner demonstrates an ability to The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 adapt their body in terms of posture, successful in creating and creating and sustaining a
 energy, weight, size and quality of sustaining a physical physical characterisation, or
 gestures, physical rhythms and habits characterisation, or there may there is excessive
 in order to successfully and be indications of unnecessary unnecessary tension
Physical
 appropriately convey the physicality of tension. Certain aspects of displayed throughout the
characterisation
 his/her character. the characterisation may be performance. The physical
 inappropriate for the characterisation is
 particular character or inappropriate for the
 context. particular character or
 context.

 75

 71
 The learner demonstrates an ability to The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 use the stage space appropriately and successful in using the stage using the stage space
 interestingly, in a way that the space appropriately and appropriately and
 performance communicates clearly to interestingly. This may be due interestingly. He/she is
Stage sense –
 the audience and indicates to self-consciousness, consistently selfconscious,
use of space
 understanding of the changing force of upstaging of others, and upstages others, uncertain
 the relationship being explored. All uncertainty in moments or and moves often without
 movement is motivated. unmotivated movements at motivation.
 times.
 The learner demonstrates an ability to The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 connect with the emotions of his/her successful in connecting with terms of connecting with the
 character appropriately and effectively the emotions of his/her emotions of his/her character
 in such a way as to convince the character appropriately and appropriately and effectively;
Emotional
 audience of the truth of these effectively; he/she may not be he/she is not at all convincing,
connection
 emotions. totally convincing at all or their emotional choices are
 moments, or may react entirely inappropriate.
 inappropriately in some
 moments.

 72
 DRAMATIC ITEM SCENE / EXTRACT - CONTINUE RUBRIC

MARKS 66-100% 30-65% 0-29%

CRITERIA ACHIEVED WITH MERIT ACHIEVED PARTIALLY ACHIEVED

 The learner demonstrates an The learner is partially successful The learner is unsuccessful in
 understanding of subtext and in terms of playing subtext and terms of playing subtext and
 intention, in order to make a intentions, and making the intentions. Lines and actions
 character’s lines and actions character’s lines and actions seem unmotivated, there is
Playing of understandable to an audience. The understandable to an audience. little evidence of thinking
subtext character’s inner life is explored and The character’s inner life is not through the subtext, lines are
 sustained throughout the fully sustained throughout the recited by rote and the
 performance. performance. character’s inner life is not
 sustained throughout the
 performance.
 The learner demonstrates the ability The learner is inconsistent in There is little or no evidence of
 to stay in character when not terms of staying in character staying in character when not
 speaking or not being the focus of when not speaking or not being speaking or not being the focus
Interaction –
 attention and continues to react and the focus of attention; reactions of attention; there is little
listening
 listen to the other characters on to the other characters and reaction to the other characters
 stage at all times. listening are not sustained and little or no listening.
 throughout the scene.
 The learner demonstrates an The learner is inconsistent in The learner is unaware of their
 understanding of his/her character’s demonstrating his/her character’s status in relation to
 status in relation to the other character’s status in relation to the other characters in the
Development
 characters in the scene and he/she the other characters in the scene; the relationship
of
 allows the relationship between the scene; the relationship between between the characters does
relationship
 characters to grow, develop and the characters does not grow, not grow, develop and change
 change appropriately. develop and change through the course of the
 appropriately. scene.
 The learner is believable at all times The learner is believable in some The learner is seldom
Believability within the context of the scene or moments within the context of believable within the context of
 play. the scene or play. the scene or play.

 The learner demonstrates an The scene does not have a There is little evidence of
 understanding of how the playwright sufficiently clear beginning, structure, no real sense of a
Structure of has structured the scene. The scene middle and end. The climax is beginning, middle and end, and
scene has a clear beginning, middle and not completely realised. the climax is not realised.
 end. There is a climax or high point to
 the scene.
 The learner demonstrates the ability There is some attempt to There is little or no attempt to
 to interpret genre and style interpret genre and style interpret genre and style
 appropriately and to fulfil the appropriately but the demands appropriately and the demands
Creation of
 demands of the genre/style in such of the genre/style are not fully of the genre/style are not
appropriate
 aspects as relationship to the realised throughout the scene. realised throughout the scene.
genre/ style
 audience, believability within style,
 timing, appropriate physical action
 etc.
 The scene is memorable, effective The scene has some memorable, The scene has few or no
Impact of and engaging. effective, engaging moments, memorable, effective, engaging
scene but these are inconsistent. moments.

 73
 DRAMATIC ITEM MONOLOGUE RUBRIC

MARKS 66-100% 30-65% 0-29%

CRITERIA ACHIEVED WITH MERIT ACHIEVED PARTIALLY ACHIEVED

 The learner knows the words of the The learner knows the words, The learner does not know the
 monologue and shows evidence of but there is some evidence of words of the monologue and
Preparation thought, planning and rehearsal. uncertainty or lack of rehearsal. does not show evidence of
 thought, planning and
 rehearsal.
 The learner demonstrates an There is evidence of some The learner demonstrates little
 exceptional understanding of the understanding of the or no understanding of the
 monologue as it stands within the monologue, but certain aspects monologue as it stands within
 context of the play as a whole. S/ have been overlooked, or this is the context of the play as a
 he understands the basic dilemma/ not consistent throughout. whole. S/he does not
Understanding conflict of the monologue, his/her There may be a possible understand the basic
of monologue character and motivation. misinterpretation on the basis dilemma/ conflict of the
 of the given circumstances. monologue, his/her character
 and motivation. There is
 complete misinterpretation on
 the basis of the given
 circumstances.
 The learner demonstrates a clear The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 understanding of how all the successful in creating and creating and sustaining a vocal
 elements of voice work come sustaining a vocal characterisation, or there is
 together to communicate the characterisation, or there may vocal strain throughout the
 personality, background, class, age, be indications of vocal strain. performance. The vocal
 education and status of the Certain aspects of the characterisation is
 speaker. S/he is able to interpret a characterisation may be inappropriate for the
Vocal
 text, make appropriate choices for inappropriate for the particular particular character or context.
characterisation
 characterisation and use these character or context.
 chosen characteristics without
 vocal strain. These characteristics
 may include: pitch, intonation,
 range, rhythm, accent, tone and
 quality in order to successfully and
 appropriately convey the character.
 The learner speaks distinctly and The learner is partially successful The learner is unsuccessful in
 audibly. S/he is able to use the in speaking distinctly and speaking distinctly and
Vocal clarity appropriate volume for a space, audibly. audibly. Volume can only be
 without vocal strain. There are momentary lapses, or attained with vocal strain.
 there are moments of strain.
 The learner demonstrates an ability The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 to adapt his/her body in terms of successful in creating and creating and sustaining a
 posture, energy, weight, size and sustaining a physical physical characterisation, or
 quality of gestures, physical characterisation, or there may there is excessive unnecessary
Physical
 rhythms and habits in order to be indications of unnecessary tension displayed throughout
characterisation
 successfully and appropriately tension. Certain aspects of the the performance. The physical
 convey the physicality of his/her characterisation may be characterisation is
 character. inappropriate for the particular inappropriate for the character
 character or context.

 74
 The learner demonstrates an ability The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 to use the stage space appropriately successful in using the stage using the stage space
 and interestingly, in such a way that space appropriately and appropriately and
 the performance communicates interestingly. interestingly. He/she is
 clearly to the audience. All This may be due to self- consistently selfconscious is
Stage sense — movement is motivated. (Note: In a consciousness and uncertainty uncertain and moves often
use of space monologue, stillness may be in moments or unmotivated without motivation.
 appropriate; however, then the movements at times.
 focus should be on how the size of
 the playing space needs to be filled
 in order for the audience to be
 affected by the performance.)
 The learner demonstrates an ability The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 to connect with the emotions of successful in terms of terms of connecting with the
 his/her character appropriately and connecting with the emotions of emotions of his/her character
 effectively in such a way as to his/her character appropriately appropriately and effectively;
Emotional
 convince the audience of the truth and effectively; he/she may not he/she is unconvincing, or his/
connection
 of these emotions. be completely convincing at all her emotional choices are
 moments, or she/he may react entirely inappropriate.
 inappropriately at certain
 moments.

 75
 DRAMATIC ITEM MONOLOGUE - continue RUBRIC

MARKS 66-100% 30-65% 0-29%

CRITERIA ACHIEVED WITH MERIT ACHIEVED PARTIALLY ACHIEVED

 The learner demonstrates an The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 understanding of subtext and successful in terms of playing playing subtext and intentions.
 intention, in order to convey the subtext and intentions, and Lines and actions seem
 character meaningfully to an conveying the character unmotivated, there is little
Playing of
 audience. The character’s inner life meaningfully to an audience. evidence of thinking through the
subtext
 is explored and sustained The character’s inner life is not subtext, lines are recited by rote
 throughout the performance. fully sustained throughout the and the character’s inner life is
 performance. not sustained throughout the
 performance.
 The learner interprets the character The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 intelligently, making choices which successful in interpreting the interpreting the character,
 are effective and appropriate, based character; certain choices are he/she makes completely
Interpretation on his/her knowledge of the play not as effective or appropriate inappropriate choices, which are
of character from which the monologue comes. as is desirable, or there is not effective and there is
 evidence of a lack of evidence of misunderstanding of
 understanding of the given the given circumstances of the
 circumstances of the play. play.
 The learner demonstrates the ability The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
 to create the invisible listener successful in creating the creating the invisible listener
 through visualisation or, if invisible listener through through visualisation. There is
 appropriate, through using the visualisation or through using little understanding of his/her
Relationship audience as this listener. S/He the audience as the listener. character’s status in relation to
to listener demonstrates an understanding of There is some understanding of the listener or what their
 his/her character’s status in relation his/her character’s status in possible responses may be.
 to the listener and his/her possible relation to the listener, but
 responses to what is being said little sense of what responses
 throughout the monologue. there are.
 The learner is believable at all times The learner is believable in The learner is seldom believable
Believability within the context of the some moments within the within the context of the
 monologue. context of the monologue. monologue.

 The learner demonstrates an The learner does not have a There is little evidence of
 understanding of how the sufficiently clear beginning, structure, no real sense of a
Structure of playwright has structured the middle and end. The climax is beginning, middle and end, and
monologue monologue. The monologue has a not completely realised. the climax is not realised.
 clear beginning, middle and end.

 The learner demonstrates an The learner does not There is little or no variety within
 understanding of the ebb and flow consistently create sufficient the monologue, pace is too
Rhythms/ of the monologue, the use of pace to variety within the monologue, regular or monotonous and
Shape of highlight or build to a climax, the pace is at times too regular or there is no evidence of different
monologue shifting rhythms of different beats monotonous and there is little beats within the monologue.
 within the monologue. evidence of different beats
 within the monologue.

 76
 The learner demonstrates the ability There is some attempt to There is little or no attempt to
 to interpret genre and style interpret genre and style interpret genre and style
 appropriately and then fulfill the appropriately but the demands appropriately and the demands
Creation of
 demands of the genre/style in terms of the genre/style are not fully of the genre/style are not
appropriate
 of such aspects as relationship to the realised throughout the realised throughout the
genre/ style
 audience, believability within style, monologue. monologue.
 timing, appropriate physical action
 etc.
 The monologue is memorable, The monologue has some The monologue has few or no
Impact of effective and engaging. memorable, effective, engaging memorable, effective, engaging
monologue moments, but these are moments.
 inconsistent.

 77
 DRAMATIC ITEM PHYSICAL THEATRE / MOVEMENT RUBRIC
MARKS 66-100% 30-65% 0-29%
ASSESSMENT CRITERIA ACHIEVED WITH MERIT ACHIEVED PARTIALLY ACHIEVED
Practical/ Performance Skills The learner uses a wide range of The learner is able to The learner is able to use a
The ability to understand and movements to create sequences use a good range of limited range of
use a range of movements, and is able to understand and use movements to create movements to create
choreographic styles and various styles and processes. sequences and shows sequences and shows little
processes. The learner shows a good an understanding of understanding of the use of
 understanding of the use of styles and processes of space, time and movement
 space, time and force. movement forms. force.
The ability to show The learner performs clearly and The learner is able to The learner is able to
competence and confidence confidently so that the perform ideas quite perform some movement
in movement performance movement ideas are understood well so that his/her ideas clearly and now
so that ideas are understood. by those watching. movement ideas are needs to develop more
 understood. confidence when showing
 his/her work to others.
Experimentation The learner uses a wide range of The learner is beginning With help the learner can
(Development and stimuli and accompaniments with to use some stimuli and use some stimuli and
realisation of ideas) confidence to create complex accompaniments with accompaniments to create
The ability to use a variety of sequences and show excellent confidence to create simple sequences. The
stimuli, accompaniments use of various movement styles. simple sequences and is learner is able to use simple
and movement styles to developing a range of movement styles to
create sequences. movement styles. complete an item.
The ability to extend and The learner is able to develop a With increasing With help and
develop an idea from the simple idea into a complex confidence the learner encouragement, the
original stimulus and to try sequence making clear decision is able to develop an learner is able to develop a
out ideas and select and about his/her work. The learner idea, trying out and simple idea trying out and
reject them with reason and can explain his/her reasons for choosing movements in choosing movements that
confidence in order to selecting certain movements with order to complete the he/she feels fit the item.
complete a task. confidence and use movement item.
 vocabulary to explain what he/
 she means.
Critical Awareness The learner is able to make The learner is able to When prompted the
The ability to make analytical detailed and analytical comments make comments that learner can make
comments which helps about movement work that lead help to improve his/her comments on movement
improve the structure and to improvements in structure and own and other people’s work his/she has done to
performance of own and performance. work. help improve the work.
others’ work.
The ability to compare and The learner can see and make The learner is able to The learner is able to see
contrast the work of subtle connections and make connections obvious connections
different movement styles. comparisons between a variety of between different between different
 movement styles and is able to movement works and movement works with help
 describe clearly what he/she styles and encouragement from
 means. the teacher.
The ability to understand the The learner shows a clear The learner is able to With prompting the learner
difference between understanding of movement talk about movement can talk about why he/ she
objective judgments and forms and structure through the using appropriate likes a movement item
personal preference when comments and vocabulary he/ words and is beginning using words to describe the
creating, using and watching she uses. The learner is aware of to be aware of his/ her movement content (e.g.
movement forms. his/her own preferences in own movement line, shape, rhythm, force,
 movement and is able to preferences. etc.)
 withhold them or use them
 appropriately.

 78
 Personal and Social Skills The learner works co-operatively The learner usually The learner can sometimes
The ability to work as a member of a group and works co-operatively work co-operatively with
cooperatively as a member contributes and shares many with other people other people sharing some
of a group, sharing ideas so ideas with the group. contributing some ideas in order to help
that the task is completed. ideas to the work of the complete a group task.
 group.
The ability to work at The learner is very well organised The learner is able to The learner can develop
developing an idea and and is able to develop ideas organise his/her work and complete some items
organising work successfully on his/her own and can develop simple of work on his/her own
independently. ideas on his/her own. with help and
 encouragement from the
 teacher.
The ability to sustain focus The learner remains interested in The learner is usually The learner is sometimes
and effort through all stages the task through all the stages of able to keep working on able to keep working on an
and kinds of work. development and works hard an idea from beginning idea from beginning to end
 even when the task is challenging. to end. when helped and
 encouraged.

 79
 DRAMATIC ITEM POETRY RUBRIC

MARKS 66-100% 30-65% 0-29%

CRITERIA ACHIEVED WITH MERIT ACHIEVED PARTIALLY ACHIEVED

 The learner knows the words of The learner knows the words, but The learner does not know the
 the poem and shows evidence of there is some evidence of words of the poem and does
Preparation thought, planning and rehearsal. uncertainty or lack of rehearsal. not show evidence of thought,
 planning and rehearsal.

 The learner demonstrates an The learner demonstrates some The learner does not
 understanding of the poem and understanding of the poem and demonstrate an understanding
Understanding
 the interpretation is appropriate his/her interpretation should be of the poem and his/her
poem
 and justified. appropriate and justified. interpretation is not
 appropriate or justified.

 The learner has an understanding The learner is only partially The learner is not successful in
 of how to convey meaning through successful in conveying the conveying the meaning of the
 the use of such elements as meaning of the poem. The poem. The meaning is not
 phrasing, pause, emphasis, meaning is not always fully clear unclear or inexpressively
Expression of
 intonation and tone. S/he is able or expressive. conveyed.
meaning
 to interpret a text using these
 elements and communicates the
 meaning of the text clearly and
 expressively.
 The learner is able to create a The learner’s voice is not The learner’s voice is not
 balanced, pleasant voice quality, consistently balanced or pleasant balanced or pleasant to listen
 which is unique, appropriate to to listen to, or there is some to, or there is evidence of
 them and shows no signs of strain. evidence of vocal strain. S/he is excessive vocal strain. S/he is
 S/he explores and utilises the not completely successful in unsuccessful in exploring and
Vocal
 expressive, interpretative and exploring and utilising the utilising the expressive,
expressiveness
 musical aspects of speech sounds expressive, interpretative and interpretative and musical
 in order to express subtleties of musical aspects of speech sounds aspects of speech sounds in
 meaning, and convey mood/ in order to express subtleties of order to express subtleties of
 atmosphere. meaning, and convey meaning, and convey
 mood/atmosphere. mood/atmosphere.
 The learner is able to speak The learner is partially successful The learner is unsuccessful in
 distinctly and audibly. S/he is able in speaking distinctly and audibly. speaking distinctly and audibly.
Vocal clarity to use the appropriate volume for There are momentary lapses, or Volume can only be attained
 a space, without vocal strain. there are moments of strain. with vocal strain.

 The learner chooses movement or The learner’s choices in terms of The learner chooses movement
 stillness appropriate to the poem movement or stillness are not or stillness which is
 and to their interpretation of it. always appropriate to the poem inappropriate to the poem OR
 S/he demonstrates control over OR there is a lack of control over there is little or no control over
Physical work his/her body in order to release his/her physicality in moments OR his/her physicality OR there is
 unnecessary tension and establish there is evidence of unnecessary evidence of excessive
 optimal alignment and balance. tension at times OR the body is unnecessary tension OR the
 The body supports the voice and is not fully integrated into the body is not integrated into the
 integrated with it. poem. poem at all.

 80
 The learner is able to connect with The learner is partially successful The learner is unsuccessful in
 the emotions of the persona in the in terms of connecting with the terms of connecting with the
 poem appropriately and emotions of the persona of the emotions of the persona of the
Emotional effectively in such a way as to poem appropriately and poem appropriately and
connection convince the audience of the truth effectively; they may not be effectively; he/she is not at all
 of these emotions. Totally convincing at all moments, convincing, or his/her
 or they may react inappropriately emotional choices are entirely
 in certain moments. inappropriate.
 The learner uses vocal and physical The creation of mood is There is little or no evidence of
Creation of expressiveness in order to create a inconsistent, inappropriate or not understanding of the mood, or
appropriate mood/atmosphere appropriate to fully sustained through the poem. the ability to create it
mood the poem. effectively using voice and
 body.
 The learner demonstrates a Not all poetic devices are handled Poetic devices are not well
 mastery of the poetic devices with mastery. handled.
Use of poetic inherent in their poem, including
devices utilisation of pause, line and verse
 lengths, rhythm, meter, rhyme,
 imagery, register, tone.
 The learner’s presentation is The poem has some memorable, The poem has few or no
Impact of memorable, effective and effective, engaging moments, but memorable, effective, engaging
poem engaging. these are inconsistent. moments.

 81
 DRAMATIC ITEM PROSE RUBRIC

MARKS 66-100% 30-65% 0-29%

CRITERIA ACHIEVED WITH MERIT ACHIEVED PARTIALLY ACHIEVED

Preparation The learner knows the words of the The learner knows the words, The learner does not know
 piece of prose and shows evidence but there is some evidence of the words of the piece of
 of thought, planning and rehearsal. uncertainty or lack of rehearsal. prose and does not show
 evidence of thought, planning
 and rehearsal.
Understanding The learner demonstrates an The learner must demonstrate The learner does not
of piece of understanding of the piece of prose some understanding of the demonstrate an
prose and his/her interpretation is piece of prose and his/her understanding of the piece of
 appropriate and justified. interpretation should be prose and his/her
 appropriate and justified. interpretation is not
 appropriate or justified.
Expression of The learner conveys meaning The learner is only partially The learner is not successful
meaning successfully through the use of such successful in conveying the in conveying the meaning of
 elements as phrasing, pause, meaning of the piece of prose. the piece of prose. The
 emphasis, intonation and tone. S/ The meaning is not always fully meaning is unclear and lacks
 he is able to interpret a text using clear or expressive. expression.
 these elements and communicates
 the meaning of the text clearly and
 expressively.
Vocal The learner uses a balanced, The learner’s voice is not The learner’s voice is not
expressiveness pleasant voice quality, which is consistently balanced or balanced or pleasant to listen
 unique, appropriate to him/her and pleasant to listen to, or there is to, or there is evidence of
 shows no signs of strain. S/he some evidence of vocal strain. excessive vocal strain. S/he is
 explores and utilises the expressive, S/ he is not completely not at all successful in
 interpretative and musical aspects successful in exploring and exploring and utilising the
 of speech sounds in order to express utilising the expressive, expressive, interpretative and
 subtleties of meaning, and convey interpretative and musical musical aspects of speech
 mood/ atmosphere. aspects of speech sounds in sounds in order to express
 order to express subtleties of subtleties of meaning, and
 meaning, and convey mood/ convey mood/ atmosphere.
 atmosphere.
Vocal clarity The learner is able to speak distinctly The learner is partially successful The learner is unsuccessful in
 and audibly. S/he is able to use the in speaking distinctly and speaking distinctly and
 appropriate volume for a space, audibly. audibly. Volume can only be
 without vocal strain. There are momentary lapses, or attained with vocal strain.
 there are moments of strain.
Physical work The learner chooses movement or The learner’s choices in terms of The learner chooses
 stillness appropriate to the piece of movement or stillness are not movement or stillness which
 prose and to his/her interpretation always appropriate to the piece is inappropriate to the piece
 of it. S/he demonstrates control of prose OR there is a lack of of prose OR there is little or
 over his/her body in order to release control over his/her physicality no control over their
 unnecessary tension and establish in moments OR there is physicality OR there is
 optimal alignment and balance. The evidence of unnecessary tension evidence of excessive
 body is used creatively and at times. There is only some unnecessary tension. There is
 expressively to assist in the evidence of creativity and little or no evidence of
 dramatisation of the piece of prose. expressiveness in the use of creativity and expressiveness
 body. in the use of body.

 82
 Dramatisation The learner uses original, effective The learner is partially effective The learner is unsuccessful in
as performance theatrical means to dramatise the or original in terms of using terms of using theatrical
piece piece of prose so that it works as a theatrical means to dramatise means to dramatise the piece
 piece of performance. the piece of prose so that it of prose so that it works as a
 works as a piece of piece of performance.
 performance.
Use of The learner is aware of the style of The learner is partially The learner is unsuccessful in
appropriate their story and the narrative successful in using the using appropriate narrative
narrative techniques inherent in it. (e.g. appropriate narrative techniques or uses
techniques intsomi telling, fairy tales or myths) techniques, or uses some but completely inappropriate
 S/He uses appropriate techniques in not others, or uses some narrative techniques, which
 his/her performance, including: inappropriate narrative do not work with the style of
 third-person narration, character techniques, which do not work his/her story.
 creation, use of song or chant etc. with the style of their story.

DRAMATIC ITEM PROSE RUBRIC

MARKS 66-100% 30-65% 0-29%

CRITERIA ACHIEVED WITH MERIT ACHIEVED PARTIALLY ACHIEVED

Creation of The learner demonstrates an ability to There is some attempt to There is little or no attempt to
appropriate use vocal and physical expressiveness interpret genre and style interpret genre and style
mood/ in order to create a mood/style/genre appropriately but the demands of appropriately and the
style/ genre appropriate to the piece of prose. the genre/style are not fully demands of the genre/style
 realised throughout the prose are not realised throughout
 piece. the prose piece.
Impact of The learner’s presentation is The prose piece has some The prose piece has few or no
prose piece memorable, effective and engaging. memorable, effective, engaging memorable,
 moments, but these are effective, engaging
 inconsistent. moments.

 83
 AUDITION PROGRAMME RUBRIC
84

 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 DESCRIPTOR
 NOT ACHIEVED MODERATELY ACHIEVED ADEQUATE ACHIEVEMENT SUBSTANTIAL ACHIEVEMENT MERITORIUS ACHIEVEMENT
 CRITERIA 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 Preparation The learner does not know The learner knows most The learner knows the words The learner has mastered The learner has mastered the
 the words of the drama item, of the words, shows some of all the drama items well, the words, has a high degree words, shows insight, is completely
 has no confidence and shows confidence and shows is confident, shows evidence of confidence and shows confident , shows evidence of
 very little evidence of thought, limited evidence of thought, of good quality of thought, evidence of excellent outstanding thought, planning
 planning and rehearsal. planning and rehearsal. planning and rehearsal. thought, planning and and rehearsal
 rehearsal.
 Vocal The learner shows no technical There is some technical There is good technical There is highly developed There is exceptionally developed
 production, proficiency. There is no proficiency. Vocal proficiency. The vocal technical proficiency. Vocal technical proficiency. Vocal
 clarity and evidence of appropriate vocal interpretation of texts and interpretation of text and interpretation of texts and interpretation of texts and vocal
 expressiveness interpretation of the text and vocal variation is evident. vocal variation is good. vocal variation are excellent. variation are exceptional.
 no vocal variation.

 Stage space Lacks confidence and is Good use of stage space. Appropriate use of stage Effective use of stage space is Exceptional use of stage space.
 unable to use stage space space. completely appropriate.
 appropriately and interestingly.
 Understanding Demonstrates no Demonstrates an adequate Demonstrates a sound Demonstrates a good Demonstrates an excellent
 of pieces understanding of the work understanding of the work understanding of the work, understanding of the work, understanding of the work and
 and there is no or very little and, within a limited range, and within satisfactory range, and within an extensive interpretation and/or
 interpretation and/or interpretation and /or the interpretation and/or range, characterisation characterisation is always accurate
 characterization. characterisation is accurate characterisation is mostly is mostly accurate and appropriate and justified.
 and appropriate. accurate and appropriate. appropriate.
 Physical Chooses inappropriate Chooses reasonably Chooses a range of Chooses a wide range of Chooses movement or stillness
 Work movement or stillness for each appropriate movement appropriate movement and appropriate movement and wholly appropriate to each piece,
 piece. Unnecessary tension. or stillness. There is stillness, demonstrating stillness, demonstrating good demonstrating excellent
 unnecessary tension in the adequate competence and competence and control. The competence, control and
 body. control. The body is aligned body is aligned and balanced versatility. The body is well aligned
 and balanced and is largely and is free of unnecessary and balanced and there is no sign
 free of unnecessary tension. tension. of unnecessary tension.
 Emotional No connection with the Connection with the Connects adequately with Connects well with the Connects strongly with the
 connection emotional tone of the work. emotional tone of the work. the emotional tone of the emotional tone of the work. emotional tone of the work.
 Emotional choices are Manages, within a limited work. Appropriate emotional Very good emotional choices. Excellent emotional choices
 inappropriate and range, to make emotional choices.
 unconvincing. choices.
 AUDITION PROGRAMME RUBRIC
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 DESCRIPTOR
 NOT ACHIEVED MODERATELY ACHIEVED ADEQUATE ACHIEVEMENT SUBSTANTIAL ACHIEVEMENT MERITORIUS ACHIEVEMENT
 CRITERIA 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 Voice-body No vocal interpretation Some vocal interpretation. Good vocal interpretation. Vocal interpretation of texts Vocal interpretation of texts and
 integration proficiency. Chooses There is unnecessary Chooses a range of and vocal variation are vocal variation is exceptional.
 inappropriate movement or tension in the body. Only appropriate movement excellent. Chooses movement / stillness
 stillness for each piece. some integration between and stillness. Chooses a Chooses a wide range of wholly appropriate to each piece.
 Unnecessary tension and no voice and body. wide range of appropriate appropriate movement and Exceptional voice and body
 integration between voice and movement and stillness. stillness. Excellent integration integration.
 body. Good integration between of voice and body.
 voice and body.
 Use of No use or awareness of vocal, Some use and awareness Good use and awareness Excellent and appropriate Outstanding and motivated
 rhythm in textual, emotional and of vocal, textual, emotional of vocal, textual, emotional awareness of vocal, textual, awareness of vocal, textual,
 performance character rhythm in and character rhythm in and character rhythm in emotional and character emotional and character rhythm
 performance. performance but the performance. Delivery is rhythm in performance. in performance. Delivery is
 interpretation and delivery consistent and evident in Delivery is consistent and consistent and evident in every
 are not consistent. some items. evident in most items. item.
 Use of design No use or interpretation of Some use and appropriate Good use and appropriate Excellent use and appropriate Outstanding use and appropriate
 and technical design and technical elements. interpretation of design and interpretation of design and interpretation of design and interpretation of design and
 elements technical elements. technical elements. technical elements. technical elements.
 Connection to Unable to connect with co- Partially able to connect Connects adequately with co- Connects consistently with Connects convincingly with co-
 listener actor, invisible partner or with co-actor, invisible actor, invisible partner or co-actor, invisible partner actor, invisible partner or audience
 audience as listener. partner or audience audience as listener. or audience as listener. as listener. Connection entirely
 as listener. Connection Connection adequately Connection consistently sustained.
 partially sustained. sustained. sustained.
 Versatility of No versatility with different Little versatility with Adequate versatility with Excellent and appropriate Outstanding and motivated
 learner performance genres, styles, different performance different performance versatility with different versatility with different
 modes and dramatic elements. genres, styles, modes and genres, styles, modes and performance genres, performance genres, styles,
 dramatic elements. dramatic elements. styles, modes and dramatic modes and dramatic elements.
 elements.
 Impact of Unengaging performance and Partially engaging Adequately engaging Consistently engaging Exceptionally engaging
 programme content, demonstrating no performance and content, performance and content, performance and content, performance and content
 creativity and/or insight. demonstrating little demonstrating occasional demonstrating consistent demonstrating consistent
 creativity and/or insight. creativity and insight. creativity and insight. creativity and insight.
85
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME FILM MAKING RUBRIC
86

 (Set, Costume, Music, Sound effects, Set pieces, Special Effects, Properties, Lighting, Make Up)
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 MARK 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 Criterion Description: the candidate is Description: the candidate Description: the candidate Description: the candidate Description: the candidate
 able, with no or very limited is able, with limited and is able, with adequate is able, with meritorious is able, with exceptional
 and basic understanding, elementary understanding, and suitable elementary elementary understanding, and excellent insight,
 technique and skill, to: technique and skill, to: understanding, technique technique and skill, to: understanding, technique
 and skill, to: and skill, to:
 Production File: · Adapt a film script, from · Adapt a film script, from · Adapt a film script, from · Adapt a film script, from · Adapt a film script, from
 Script and script a published work (play, a published work (play, a published work (play, a published work (play, a published work (play,
 interpretation/ poem or prose) to create poem or prose) to create poem or prose) to create poem or prose) to create poem or prose) to create
 adaptation for a cinematic / audio-visual a cinematic / audio-visual a cinematic / audio-visual a cinematic / audio-visual a cinematic / audio-visual
 film product which works for product which works for product which works for product which works for product which works for
 screen screen. screen. screen. screen.
 · Convey the essence of the · Convey the essence of the · Convey the essence of the · Convey the essence of the · Convey the essence of the
 source work. source work. source work. source work. source work.
 · Ensure an appropriate · Ensure an appropriate · Ensure an appropriate · Ensure an appropriate · Ensure an appropriate
 narrative arc with a sense narrative arc with a sense narrative arc with a sense narrative arc with a sense narrative arc with a sense
 of beginning middle and of beginning middle and of beginning middle and of beginning middle and of beginning middle and
 end – even if it is cyclical or end – even if it is cyclical or end – even if it is cyclical or end – even if it is cyclical or end – even if it is cyclical or
 repetitive. repetitive. repetitive. repetitive. repetitive.
 Production File: · Demonstrate extensive · Demonstrate extensive · Demonstrate extensive · Demonstrate extensive · Demonstrate extensive
 Pre-production pre-production work in a pre-production work in a pre-production work in a pre-production work in a pre-production work in a
 and production production file and journal production file and journal production file and journal production file and journal production file and journal
 planning and to convey the thinking, to convey the thinking, to convey the thinking, to convey the thinking, to convey the thinking,
 documents: shot- planning and process planning and process planning and process planning and process planning and process
 list, call-sheet, behind the film. behind the film. behind the film. behind the film. behind the film.
 contingencies,
 etc. · Include documents such · Include documents such · Include documents such · Include documents such · Include documents such
 as treatments, notes on as treatments, notes on as treatments, notes on as treatments, notes on as treatments, notes on
 production design, a script production design, a script production design, a script production design, a script production design, a script
 outline, storyboards, a shot outline, storyboards, a shot outline, storyboards, a shot outline, storyboards, a shot outline, storyboards, a shot
 list, a call sheet (containing list, a call sheet (containing list, a call sheet (containing list, a call sheet (containing list, a call sheet (containing
 all the key details of the all the key details of the all the key details of the all the key details of the all the key details of the
 shoot). shoot). shoot). shoot). shoot).
 · Include a contingency · Include a contingency · Include a contingency · Include a contingency · Include a contingency
 planning process. planning process. planning process. planning process. planning process.
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME FILM MAKING RUBRIC
 (Set, Costume, Music, Sound effects, Set pieces, Special Effects, Properties, Lighting, Make Up)
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 MARK 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 Criterion Description: the candidate is Description: the candidate Description: the candidate Description: the candidate Description: the candidate
 able, with no or very limited is able, with limited and is able, with adequate is able, with meritorious is able, with exceptional
 and basic understanding, elementary understanding, and suitable elementary elementary understanding, and excellent insight,
 technique and skill, to: technique and skill, to: understanding, technique technique and skill, to: understanding, technique
 and skill, to: and skill, to:
 Production File: · Demonstrate extensive · Demonstrate extensive · Demonstrate extensive · Demonstrate extensive · Demonstrate extensive
 Post-production work in a production file work in a production file work in a production file work in a production file work in a production file
 documents and and journal to convey the and journal to convey the and journal to convey the and journal to convey the and journal to convey the
 reflection post-production process. post-production process. post-production process. post-production process. post-production process.
 · Include log sheets, other · Include log sheets, other · Include log sheets, other · Include log sheets, other · Include log sheets, other
 editing notes, notes on editing notes, notes on editing notes, notes on editing notes, notes on editing notes, notes on
 the process and difficulties the process and difficulties the process and difficulties the process and difficulties the process and difficulties
 encountered. encountered. encountered. encountered. encountered.
 Cinematography · Plan appropriate shots for · Plan appropriate shots for · Plan appropriate shots for · Plan appropriate shots for · Plan appropriate shots for
 the script and convey these the script and convey these the script and convey these the script and convey these the script and convey these
 through their storyboards. through their storyboards. through their storyboards. through their storyboards. through their storyboards.
 · Compose and shoot · Compose and shoot · Compose and shoot · Compose and shoot · Compose and shoot
 well-motivated, well-lit, well-motivated, well-lit, well-motivated, well-lit, well-motivated, well-lit, well-motivated, well-lit,
 varied visuals which use varied visuals which use varied visuals which use varied visuals which use varied visuals which use
 shot scale, movement shot scale, movement shot scale, movement shot scale, movement shot scale, movement
 and camera angles to and camera angles to and camera angles to and camera angles to and camera angles to
 complement and enhance complement and enhance complement and enhance complement and enhance complement and enhance
 content and mood. content and mood. content and mood. content and mood. content and mood.
87
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME FILM MAKING- CONTINUE RUBRIC
 (Set, Costume, Music, Sound effects, Set pieces, Special Effects, Properties, Lighting, Make Up)
88

 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 MARK 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 Criterion Description: the candidate is Description: the candidate Description: the candidate Description: the candidate Description: the candidate
 able, with no or very limited is able, with limited and is able, with adequate is able, with meritorious is able, with exceptional
 and basic understanding, elementary understanding, and suitable elementary elementary understanding, and excellent insight,
 technique and skill, to: technique and skill, to: understanding, technique technique and skill, to: understanding, technique
 and skill, to: and skill, to:
 Mise en Scene · Use elements such as set, · Use elements such as set, · Use elements such as set, · Use elements such as set, · Use elements such as set,
 costumes, props, make-up costumes, props, make-up costumes, props, make-up costumes, props, make-up costumes, props, make-up
 and lighting to enhance and lighting to enhance and lighting to enhance and lighting to enhance and lighting to enhance
 and support the overall and support the overall and support the overall and support the overall and support the overall
 production design. production design. production design. production design. production design.
 Audio elements / · Produce a soundtrack with · Produce a soundtrack with · Produce a soundtrack with · Produce a soundtrack with · Produce a soundtrack with
 Effects clearly audible ambient clearly audible ambient clearly audible ambient clearly audible ambient clearly audible ambient
 sound, dialogue and sound sound, dialogue and sound sound, dialogue and sound, dialogue and sound sound, dialogue and sound
 effects (if relevant). effects (if relevant). sound effects (if relevant). effects (if relevant). effects (if relevant).
 · Use, copyright-free music · Use, copyright-free music · Use, copyright-free music · Use, copyright-free music · Use, copyright-free music
 to create mood and to create mood and to create mood and to create mood and to create mood and
 support visual and narrative support visual and narrative support visual and narrative support visual and narrative support visual and narrative
 elements. elements. elements. elements. elements.
 Editing · Edit the film in a way that · Edit the film in a way that · Edit the film in a way that · Edit the film in a way that · Edit the film in a way that
 ensures narrative and ensures narrative and ensures narrative and ensures narrative and ensures narrative and
 visual flow, demonstrates visual flow, demonstrates visual flow, demonstrates visual flow, demonstrates visual flow, demonstrates
 an understanding of the an understanding of the an understanding of the an understanding of the an understanding of the
 “grammar” of editing, is “grammar” of editing, is “grammar” of editing, is “grammar” of editing, is “grammar” of editing, is
 free of unintentional errors free of unintentional errors free of unintentional errors free of unintentional errors free of unintentional errors
 and enhances the overall and enhances the overall and enhances the overall and enhances the overall and enhances the overall
 style of the film. style of the film. style of the film. style of the film. style of the film.
 Performance · Appropriately cast the roles. · Appropriately cast the roles. · Appropriately cast the roles. · Appropriately cast the roles. · Appropriately cast the roles.
 elements
 · Elicit engaging and · Elicit engaging and · Elicit engaging and · Elicit engaging and · Elicit engaging and
 (direction, choices,
 convincing performances convincing performances convincing performances convincing performances convincing performances
 etc.) appropriate in style to the appropriate in style to the appropriate in style to the appropriate in style to the appropriate in style to the
 short film. short film. short film. short film. short film.
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME FILM MAKING- CONTINUE RUBRIC
 (Set, Costume, Music, Sound effects, Set pieces, Special Effects, Properties, Lighting, Make Up)
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 MARK 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 Criterion Description: the candidate is Description: the candidate Description: the candidate Description: the candidate Description: the candidate
 able, with no or very limited is able, with limited and is able, with adequate is able, with meritorious is able, with exceptional
 and basic understanding, elementary understanding, and suitable elementary elementary understanding, and excellent insight,
 technique and skill, to: technique and skill, to: understanding, technique technique and skill, to: understanding, technique
 and skill, to: and skill, to:
 Overall impact of · Create an original, engaging · Create an original, engaging · Create an original, engaging · Create an original, engaging · Create an original, engaging
 the film and satisfying short film and satisfying short film and satisfying short film and satisfying short film and satisfying short film
 which communicates which communicates which communicates which communicates which communicates
 clearly. clearly. clearly. clearly. clearly.
 · Ensure that all the elements · Ensure that all the elements · Ensure that all the elements · Ensure that all the elements · Ensure that all the elements
 (performance, visual, audio, (performance, visual, audio, (performance, visual, audio, (performance, visual, audio, (performance, visual, audio,
 editing) work cohesively editing) work cohesively editing) work cohesively editing) work cohesively editing) work cohesively
 together. together. together. together. together.
 Interview with the · Articulate their intentions · Articulate their intentions · Articulate their intentions · Articulate their intentions · Articulate their intentions
 candidate regarding the short film regarding the short film regarding the short film regarding the short film regarding the short film
 and discuss the influences, and discuss the influences, and discuss the influences, and discuss the influences, and discuss the influences,
 interests and ideas that interests and ideas that interests and ideas that interests and ideas that interests and ideas that
 motivated the work. motivated the work. motivated the work. motivated the work. motivated the work.
 · Explain the choices made · Explain the choices made · Explain the choices made · Explain the choices made · Explain the choices made
 at each stage of the at each stage of the at each stage of the at each stage of the at each stage of the
 production and justify any production and justify any production and justify any production and justify any production and justify any
 major changes made. major changes made. major changes made. major changes made. major changes made.
 · Disclose any assistance · Disclose any assistance · Disclose any assistance · Disclose any assistance · Disclose any assistance
 received and motivate why received and motivate why received and motivate why received and motivate why received and motivate why
 this was justified. this was justified. this was justified. this was justified. this was justified.
 · Convince examiners that · Convince examiners that · Convince examiners that · Convince examiners that · Convince examiners that
 the short film is their own the short film is their own the short film is their own the short film is their own the short film is their own
 creation. creation. creation. creation. creation.
89
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME DESIGN RUBRIC
90

 SET, COSTUME, MUSIC, SOUND EFFECTS, SET PIECES, SPECIAL EFFECTS, PROPERTIES, LIGHTING, MAKE-UP
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 CRITERIA 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 The candidate fails to The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates
 demonstrate understanding limited understanding that adequate understanding that complete understanding that outstanding and insightful
 that the role of the designer the role of the Designer is to the role of the Designer is to the role of the Designer is to understanding that the role
 is to research, conceptualise research, conceptualise and research, conceptualise and research, conceptualise and of the Designer is to
 and actualise the world of the actualise the world of the play actualise the world of the play actualise the world of the play research, conceptualise and
 Role of the
 play through design elements through design elements e.g. through design elements e.g. through design elements e.g. actualise the world of the play
 designer
 e.g. set, costume, music, set, costume, music, sound set, costume, music, sound set, costume, music, sound through design elements e.g.
 sound effects, set pieces, effects, set pieces, special effects, set pieces, special effects, set pieces, special set, costume, music, sound
 special effects, properties, effects, properties, lighting, effects, properties, lighting, effects, properties, lighting, effects, set pieces, special
 lighting, make-up. make-up. make-up. make-up. effects, properties, lighting,
 make-up.
 The candidate fails to The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates
 demonstrate understanding limited understanding of adequate understanding of complete and highly effective outstanding, insightful and
 of how to interpret and realise how to interpret and realise how to interpret and realise understanding of how to highly effective understanding
 in her/his design the given in her/his design the given in her/his design the given interpret and realise in of how to interpret and
 Given circum- circum-stances e.g. plot, circumstances e.g. plot, the circumstances e.g. plot, the her/his design the given realise in her/his design the
 stances the facts, the incidents, the facts, the incidents, the facts, the incidents, the circumstances e.g. plot, the given circumstances e.g. plot,
 period, the time and place of period, the time and place of period, the time and place of facts, the incidents, the the facts, the incidents, the
 the action and the way of life the action and the way of life the action and the way of life period, the time and place of period, the time and place of
 in the play. in the play. in the play. the action and the way of life the action and the way of life
 in the play. in the play.
 The candidate fails to The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates
 demonstrate understanding limited understanding of how adequate understanding complete and highly effective outstanding, insightful and
 of how to interpret and to interpret and realise in her/ of how to interpret and understanding of how to highly effective understanding
 realise in her/his design the his design the background realise in her/his design the interpret and realise in her/ of how to interpret and
 Background and
 background and context of and context of the play: social, background and context of his design the background realise in her/his design the
 context
 the play: social, political, political, religious, economic, the play: social, political, and context of the play: social, background and context of
 religious, economic, artistic, artistic, historical, theatrical. religious, economic, artistic, political, religious, economic, the play: social, political,
 historical, theatrical. historical, theatrical. artistic, historical, theatrical. religious, economic, artistic,
 historical, theatrical.
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME DESIGN RUBRIC
 SET, COSTUME, MUSIC, SOUND EFFECTS, SET PIECES, SPECIAL EFFECTS, PROPERTIES, LIGHTING, MAKE-UP
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 CRITERIA 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 The candidate fails to The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates
 demonstrate understanding limited understanding of how adequate understanding of complete and highly effective outstanding, insightful and
 of how to create appropriate to create appropriate designs how to create appropriate understanding of how to highly effective understanding
 Theatre spaces designs for the different for the different stage spaces designs for the different create appropriate designs of how to create appropriate
 stage spaces e.g. proscenium, e.g. proscenium, arena, stage spaces e.g. proscenium, for the different stage spaces designs for the different
 arena, thrust, etc. thrust, etc. arena, thrust, etc. e.g. proscenium, arena, stage spaces e.g. proscenium,
 thrust, etc. arena, thrust, etc.
 The candidate fails to explore The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate shows
 ideas for possible design moderate generation of ideas adequate generation of ideas good generation of ideas for evidence of excellent idea-
 elements in any detail or for possible design elements for possible design elements, possible design elements, generation and
 does so in only one design in at least two of the design with some selection of visual with a good selection of brainstorming, with a range
 Generating ideas category. categories. and sensory material visual and sensory material of visual and sensory material
 for design collected for use in the final collected for use in the final collected for use in the final
 concept design, in at least two of the design, in at least three design conceptualisation in
 design categories. of the design categories, at least three of the design
 demonstrating some original categories, demonstrating
 thinking. excellent original thinking and
 creativity.
91
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME DESIGN – CONTINUE RUBRIC
92

 SET, COSTUME, MUSIC, SOUND EFFECTS, SET PIECES, SPECIAL EFFECTS, PROPERTIES, LIGHTING, MAKE-UP
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 DESCRIPTOR 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 The candidate fails to The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates The candidate demonstrates
 demonstrate understanding, moderate understanding, adequate understanding, good understanding, exceptional understanding,
 Design elements; selection and creation of selection and creation of selection and creation of selection and creation of selection and creation of
 appropriate and relevant appropriate and relevant appropriate and relevant appropriate and relevant appropriate and relevant
 visual and aural design elements, or does so design elements in at least design elements in at least design elements in at least design elements in at least
 in only one design category. two of the design categories. two of the design categories. three of the design three of the design categories.
 categories.
 The candidate fails to realise The candidate realises The candidate realises his/ The candidate realises his/ The candidate realizes his/her
 his/her ideas practically in his/her ideas practically in her ideas practically in the her ideas practically in the ideas practically in the final
 the final design of the piece. the final design of the final design of the piece, in final design of the piece, in at design of the piece, in at least
 This may be due to the use piece, in one or two of the at least two design least three design categories, three design categories, to
 Realisation of
 of inappropriate materials, design categories. Some categories to some extent. to good effect. The majority exceptional effect. All design
 design elements
 insufficient care taken, design elements may be Some design elements may of design elements work and technical elements work
 equipment malfunctioning stronger than others, with be stronger than others, seamlessly and there are seamlessly, supporting the final
 etc. noticeable technical glitches with some technical glitches few, if any, technical glitches performance and its reception
 in realisation. in realisation. in realisation. by the audience.
 The candidate fails to bring The candidate brings The candidate brings The candidate brings The candidate brings design
 the different design different design elements different design elements different design elements elements together seamlessly
 elements together so that together in one or two together in at least two together in at least three and to exceptional effect so
 Creating a they work cohesively and design categories but there design categories but there design categories, to good that they together contribute
 cohesive together contribute to a are some elements missing is something missing or at effect contributing to the to a cohesive theatrical whole
 theatrical whole cohesive theatrical whole. or at odds, which prevent odds which prevent the creation of a cohesive of considerable impact and
 the creation of a cohesive creation of a cohesive theatrical whole. power. Design elements are
 theatrical whole. theatrical whole. found across three or more
 design categories.
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME DESIGN – CONTINUE RUBRIC
 SET, COSTUME, MUSIC, SOUND EFFECTS, SET PIECES, SPECIAL EFFECTS, PROPERTIES, LIGHTING, MAKE-UP
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 DESCRIPTOR 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 The candidate fails to submit The candidate submits a The candidate submits a The candidate submits a The candidate submits a
 a *D/TMN with evidence of *D/TMN with limited and *D/TMN with adequate *D/TMN with complete *D/TMN with outstanding,
 research, preliminary and incomplete evidence of evidence of research, and insightful evidence of insightful and highly effective
 Director/ Theatre final technical plans and research, preliminary and preliminary and final research, preliminary and evidence of research,
 Maker Notebook sketches such as lighting, final technical plans and technical plans and sketches final technical plans and preliminary and final technical
 *(D/TMN) sound, etc. with artistic sketches such as lighting, such as lighting, sound, etc. sketches such as lighting, plans and sketches such as
 motivations and execution sound, etc. with artistic with artistic motivations sound, etc. with artistic lighting, sound, etc. with
 of the plan. motivations and execution and execution of the plan. motivations and execution of artistic motivations and
 of the plan. the plan. execution of the plan.
 The candidate fails to arrive The candidate arrives for the The candidate’s responses The candidate’s responses The candidate’s responses to
 for the interview or fails to interview; responses to the to the interview panel’s to the interview panel’s the interview panel’s questions
 Interview provide satisfactory answers interview panel’s questions questions and enquiries questions and enquiries and enquiries are outstanding,
 posed by the interview are limited and often not are adequately and partly are insightful and well- insightful and highly effectively
 panel. satisfactorily motivated. satisfactorily motivated. motivated. motivated.
93
 TECHNICALTHEATRE PROGRAMME DIRECTING / THEATRE MAKING RUBRIC
94

 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 DESCRIPTOR 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 The candidate fails to The candidate partially The candidate adequately The candidate has a The candidate has an
 understand that the role of understands that the role understands that the role complete understanding of exceptional insightful
 the director/ theatre maker of the *D/TM is to be of the *D/TM is to be the role of the *D/TM to be understanding of the
 is to be responsible for the responsible for the overall responsible for the overall responsible for the overall role of the *D/TM to be
 overall aural and visual world aural and visual world of aural and visual world of aural and visual world of responsible for the overall
 of the play. e.g. creating a the play. e.g. creating a the play. e.g. creating a the play. e.g. creating a aural and visual world of
 The role of the vision, applying appropriate vision, applying appropriate vision, applying appropriate vision, applying appropriate the play. e.g. creating a
 director/ theatre styles and genres, technical styles and genres, technical styles and genres, technical styles and genres, technical vision, applying appropriate
 maker aspects, design elements aspects, design elements aspects, design elements aspects, design elements styles and genres, technical
 *(D/TM) (lighting, sound, costume, (lighting, sound, costume, (lighting, sound, costume, (lighting, sound, costume, aspects, design elements
 make-up, set), the publicity make-up, set), the publicity make-up, set), the publicity make-up, set), the publicity (lighting, sound, costume,
 (poster, programme and (poster, programme and (poster, programme and (poster, programme and make-up, set), the publicity
 marketing) and finally marketing) and finally marketing) and finally marketing) and finally (poster, programme and
 directing the actors and their directing the actors and their directing the actors and their directing the actors and their marketing) and finally
 performances. performances. performances. performances. directing the actors and their
 performances.
 The candidate fails to provide The candidate provides an The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides
 Script analysis: an appropriate list of given incomplete and limited list of a complete list of given a complete list of given a complete list of given
 circumstances. given circumstances which is circumstances which is circumstances and circumstances and
 Given appropriate to the assigned wholly appropriate to the describes all of the flexible describes all of the flexible
 circumstances play. assigned play. circumstances. circumstances with insight
 and creativity.
 The candidate fails to The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides
 Script analysis: submit character objectives, incomplete character appropriate character insightful character insightful and creative
 thus demonstrating a lack objectives and obstacles objectives and obstacles objectives and obstacles character objectives and
 Character of understanding of the demonstrating a limited demonstrating an demonstrating a mastery of obstacles demonstrating
 objectives & assigned play. understanding of the understanding of the the assigned play. mastery and creative
 obstacles assigned play. assigned play. understanding of the
 assigned play.
 The candidate fails to The candidate submits The candidate submits an The candidate submits an The candidate submits an
 submit a script analysis a limited script analysis adequate script analysis insightful script analysis insightful and creative script
 Script analysis: and description of and description of the and description of the and description of the analysis and description of
 Character character relationships character relationships character relationships which character relationships which the character relationships
 relation-ships thus demonstrating a lack which demonstrates a demonstrates an adequate demonstrates a mastery of which demonstrates a
 of understanding of the limited understanding of the understanding of the the assigned play. complete and creative
 assigned play. assigned play. assigned play. mastery of the assigned play.
 TECHNICALTHEATRE PROGRAMME DIRECTING / THEATRE MAKING RUBRIC
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 DESCRIPTOR 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 The candidate fails to submit The candidate submits The candidate submits an The candidate submits an The candidate submits an
 Script analysis: an analysis of the themes in a limited analysis of the adequate analysis of the insightful analysis of the exceptionally creative and
 Theme analysis the play. themes in the play. themes in the play. themes in the play. insightful analysis of the
 themes in the play.
 The candidate fails to create The candidate creates a The candidate creates an The candidate creates a The candidate creates an
 Script analysis:
 a director’s vision in terms of limited director’s vision in adequate but predictable and unique director’s vision in exceptionally unique and
 Director’s/
 the aural and visual world of terms of the aural and visual conventional director’s vision terms of the aural and visual creative director’s vision in
 theatre maker’s
 the play. world of the play. in terms of the aural and world of the play. terms of the aural and visual
 vision
 visual world of the play. world of the play.
 The candidate fails to The candidate translates, The candidate adequately, The candidate creatively The candidate, creatively,
 translate the vision for but limitedly, the vision for but predictably, translates translates the vision for uniquely and with insight,
 the play into the concrete the play into the concrete the vision for the play the play into the concrete translates the vision for
 Script Analysis: aspects required for a play aspects required for a play into the concrete aspects aspects required for a play the play into the concrete
 in the form of sketches and in the form of sketches and required for a play in the in the form of sketches and aspects required for a play
 Director/ Theatre or notes e.g. set, costume, or notes e.g. set, costume, form of sketches and or notes or notes e.g. set, costume, in the form of sketches and
 maker’s designs lighting, sound, staging, lighting, sound, staging, e.g. set, costume, lighting, lighting, sound, staging, or notes e.g. set, costume,
 movement, blocking, acting movement, blocking, acting sound, staging, movement, movement, blocking, acting lighting, sound, staging,
 style and genre. style and genre. blocking, acting style and style and genre movement, blocking,
 genre. acting style and genre in
 an exceptionally creative
 manner.
 The candidate fails to arrive The candidate arrives on time The candidate arrives on time The candidate arrives The candidate arrives
 on time for many rehearsals for most rehearsals and/or for all scheduled rehearsals sufficiently early to conduct sufficiently early to conduct
 Rehearsal and/or performances. performances. and performances. warm-ups, physically and warm ups, physically and
 process: vocally, for all scheduled vocally, for all scheduled
 rehearsals and performances. rehearsals and performances.
 Punctuality Focus exercises and
 motivational sessions are
 conducted with the cast.
95
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME DIRECTING / THEATRE MAKING - CONTINUE RUBRIC
96

 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 DESCRIPTOR 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 The candidate fails The candidate only at The candidate adequately The candidate explores and The candidate, with skill and
 to facilitate choices times facilitates choices facilitates choices the facilitates many creative insight, explores and facilitates
 Rehearsal the actor has to make the actor has to make actor has to make for options in order to assist the many creative options in
 process: for characterisation for characterisation characterisation appropriate actor in determining the best order to assist the actor in
 Characterisation appropriate to the appropriate to the to the script and director’s choices of characterisation determining the best choices of
 script and director’s script and director’s interpretation. for the script and director’s characterisation for the script
 interpretation. interpretation. interpretation. and director’s interpretation.
 The candidate fails to stay The candidate stays The candidate actively The candidate actively The candidate actively
 Rehearsal focused on her/his work focused on her/his work concentrates during concentrates during concentrates during rehearsals
 process: during rehearsals and/or during rehearsals and/or rehearsals and rehearsals and performances and performances and offers
 Concentration performances. performances. performances. and offers insights to the creative and insightful options
 actors. and insights to the actors.
 The candidate fails to use The candidate sometimes The candidate uses The candidate uses The candidate uses appropriate
 appropriate acting and uses appropriate acting and appropriate acting and appropriate acting and acting and directing terminology
 Rehearsal directing terminology, e.g. directing terminology, e.g. directing terminology, e.g. directing terminology with with confidence and effective
 process: Directing: blocking, cross Directing: blocking, cross confidence, e.g. Directing: and clear communication skills,
 over, masking, etc. Directing: blocking, cross over, masking, etc. blocking, cross over, masking, e.g.
 Directing and over, masking, etc. etc.
 Acting: magic if, Acting: magic if, Directing: blocking, cross over,
 acting Acting: magic if,
 concentration, given concentration, given Acting: magic if, masking, etc.
 circumstances, units concentration, given circumstances, units concentration, given
 (Stanislavski)
 and objectives, emotion circumstances, units and objectives, emotion circumstances, units and Acting: magic if, concentration,
 terminology memory, tempo-rhythm, and objectives, emotion memory, tempo-rhythm, objectives, emotion memory, given circumstances, units and
 relaxation. memory, tempo-rhythm, relaxation. tempo-rhythm, relaxation. objectives, emotion memory,
 relaxation. tempo-rhythm, relaxation.
 The candidate fails to The candidate adequately The candidate understands The candidate understands The candidate understands
 understand the differences, understands the the differences, uses and the differences, uses and the differences, uses and
 uses and conventions of differences, uses and conventions of various conventions of various conventions of various
 Rehearsal various performance spaces conventions of various performance spaces and is performance spaces and is performance spaces and is able
 process: and is not able to select an performance spaces and is able to select an appropriate able to select an appropriate to select a creative and dynamic
 Performance appropriate performance able to select an adequate performance space for and creative performance performance space for the
 space space for the selected play. performance space for the the selected play and has space for the selected selected play and has utilised
 selected play. utilised it in a manner play and has utilised it in it in an insightful, creative and
 appropriate to the selected a creative manner for the unique manner for the selected
 play. selected play. play.
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME DIRECTING / THEATRE MAKING - CONTINUE RUBRIC
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 DESCRIPTOR 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 The candidate fails to The candidate adequately The candidate effectively The candidate effectively, The candidate creatively and
 implement appropriate implements appropriate and uniquely implements creatively and uniquely dynamically, with unique insight,
 Rehearsal and effective staging and effective staging appropriate and effective implements appropriate and implements appropriate and
 process: conventions such as up- conventions such as up- staging conventions such effective staging conventions effective staging conventions
 Staging stage, centre stage, down stage, centre stage, down as up-stage, centre stage, such as up-stage, centre such as up-stage, centre stage,
 conventions stage, stage left, stage stage, stage left, stage down stage, stage left, stage stage, down stage, stage down stage, stage left, stage
 right, prompt and opposite right, prompt and opposite right, prompt and opposite left, stage right, prompt and right, prompt and opposite
 prompt. prompt. prompt. opposite prompt. prompt.
 The candidate fails to arrive The candidate arrives for The candidate submits a The candidate submits a The candidate submits a
 for the interview or fails to the interview but submits complete and adequate complete DTHN containing complete DTHN containing
 submit a director/theatre- an incomplete or limited DTHN or fails to adequately creative evidence and creative and unique evidence
 Interview maker notebook (DTHN) or DTHN or fails to provide provide satisfactory answers provides thoughtful and and provides thoughtful,
 fails to provide satisfactory satisfactory answers posed posed by the examination motivated responses to insightful and motivated
 answers posed by the by the examination panel. panel. the answers posed by the responses to the answers posed
 examination panel. examination panel. by the examination panel.

 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME STAGE MANAGEMENT RUBRIC
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 CRITERIA 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 DESCRIPTOR NOT ACHIEVED MODERATELY ADEQUATE SUBSTANTIAL ACHIEVEMENT MERITORIUS ACHIEVEMENT
 ACHIEVED ACHIEVEMENT
 The candidate fails to The candidate provides The candidate The candidate provides a props The candidate provides a props list with
 Prop list provide a props list or a props list with provides a props list list with evidence of all props evidence of all props and all scenes are
 provides an extremely evidence of only some with evidence of all and all scenes are included. included. The functions of the props are
 (where limited list. props. props; most scenes are Research around suitable props also included. Research around suitable
 applicable) included. is provided. props is extensive and the best selections
 have been made.
 The candidate fails to The candidate The candidate provides The candidate provides a list of The candidate provides a list of all
 Costume list provide a costume list provides a limited a list of all costumes all costumes and all scenes for costumes and all scenes for use are
 or extremely limited and incomplete list of and some scenes for use are indicated but list lacks indicated. Detail is provided and the list
 (where list in evidence and costumes. No scenes use are indicated. detail. Research around suitable is easy to navigate. Research around
 applicable) scenes for use are not for use are indicated. costumes is provided. suitable costumes is extensive and the best
 indicated. selections have been made.
97
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME STAGE MANAGEMENT RUBRIC
98

 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 CRITERIA 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 DESCRIPTOR NOT ACHIEVED MODERATELY ADEQUATE SUBSTANTIAL ACHIEVEMENT MERITORIUS ACHIEVEMENT
 ACHIEVED ACHIEVEMENT
 The candidate fails to The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides a The candidate provides a complete
 Furniture list provide a furniture list. a furniture list. Some a furniture list of most complete furniture list, scenes furniture list, scenes for use are indicated
 furniture is listed and furniture as well as for use are indicated and and the function of each piece of furniture.
 (where scenes for use are not most scenes for use is most functions are indicated. The list is easy to navigate. Research
 applicable) indicated. indicated. Research around suitable around suitable furniture is extensive and
 furniture is provided. the best selections have been made
 The candidate fails to The candidate provides The candidate provides Complete cast list is supplied Complete cast list is supplied for each
 provide a cast list. evidence of some cast a complete cast list but for each scene with contact scene with full contact details via different
 Cast list with
 members listed for not for each scene with details in at least 1 medium of mediums of communication.
 contact numbers
 some scene(s) with most contact details. communication.
 some contact details.
 The candidate fails to The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides evidence of
 provide evidence of evidence of some evidence of indicated evidence of indicated sound indicated sound cues with impulse,
 sound cues indicated. sound cues with sound sound cues with cues with impulse, reflecting reflecting speaker selection and sound
 Sound cues
 levels indicated. impulse reflecting speaker selection and sound level, with appropriate anticipation
 (where
 speaker selection and level but sound level not markers. The sound level is appropriate
 applicable)
 sound level. always appropriate to for the to for the performance space. Placement
 performance space. of speakers has been considered and is
 effective.
 The candidate fails The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides evidence The candidate provides evidence indicated
 Light cues (where to provide evidence evidence indicated evidence indicated indicated in the stage manager in the stage manager prompt book, of all
 applicable) indicated in the stage in the stage manager in the stage manager prompt book, of LX cues, with LX cues correctly indicated, with impulse
 (consider manager prompt book, prompt book, of some prompt book, of LX cues impulse indicated, reflecting and appropriate anticipation markings,
 equipment of LX cues indicated. LX cues reflecting light reflecting light area and light area and light intensity as reflecting light area and light intensity
 available) intensity. light intensity as well as well as timing. appropriate to the performance space as
 timing. well as timing.
 The candidate fails The candidate provides The candidate The candidate provides evidence The candidate provides evidence of
 to provide notes of evidence of some provides evidence of of all movements noted all movements noted with the use of
 Movements
 movements indicated movements noted all movements noted with the use of appropriate appropriate abbreviations and reference to
 noted
 in the stage manager indicated in the stage indicated in the stage abbreviations, indicated in the furniture and décor indicated in the stage
 prompt book. manager prompt book. manager prompt book. stage manager prompt book. manager prompt book.
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME STAGE MANAGEMENT- CONTINUE RUBRIC
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 CRITERIA 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 DESCRIPTOR NOT ACHIEVED MODERATELY ACHIEVED ADEQUATE ACHIEVEMENT SUBSTANTIAL ACHIEVEMENT MERITORIUS ACHIEVEMENT
 The candidate fails to The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides evidence, in the
 provide evidence of evidence, in the stage evidence, in the stage evidence, in the stage stage manager prompt book, of all scene
 indicated scene changes manager prompt book, of manager prompt book, manager prompt book, of changes indicated with notes of actions
 Scene changes in the stage manager some scene changes with of all scene changes with all scene changes with notes that should be executed with appropriate
 prompt book. some actions that should notes of actions that should of actions that should be call indications, timing and crew/actors
 be taken. be executed. executed and crew/actors involved.
 involved.
 The candidate fails to The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides The candidate provides evidence, in the
 provide evidence, in the evidence, in the stage evidence, in the stage evidence, in the stage stage manager prompt book, of all calls
 Calls stage manager prompt manager prompt book, manager prompt book, of manager prompt book, of all noted with time indications as well as
 book, of calls. of some calls with some all calls with impulses. calls, time indications as well impulses and, where needed, anticipation
 impulses. as impulses. markings with clear indications of time.
 The candidate fails to The candidate provides, The candidate provides, The candidate provides, in The candidate provides, in the stage
 indicate, in the stage in the stage manager in the stage manager the stage manager prompt manager prompt book, appropriate
 Opening
 manager prompt book, prompt book, only brief prompt book, a protocol book, appropriate protocol protocol for opening and closing
 and closing
 the list of opening and opening and closing for opening and closing for opening and closing procedures with calls and timing as well
 procedures
 closing procedures. procedures. procedures. procedures including calls as the impulses required. Relevant crew/
 and the impulses required. actors are listed with calls.
 The candidate fails to do The candidate provides The candidate provides a The candidate provides a The candidate provides a clearly
 a layout of props. a map of evidence of a map indicating the layout marked map indicating the marked map indicating a thoughtful
 Map of layout layout of some props. of props on a prop table. layout of all props on a prop layout of all props used on a prop table.
 of props table table. Differentiating order of props according
 to scenes and/or other appropriate
 criteria.
 The candidate fails to The candidate submits The candidate submits The candidate submits a The candidate submits a clearly labelled
 submit a stage map, or a a basic stage map a functional stage map clearly labelled stage map stage map indicating accurate placement
 Floor plan of
 form thereof, indicating indicating props, indicating all props, indicating all props, furniture of all props, furniture and décor for each
 stage setup
 some aspects of props, furniture and décor. furniture and décor. and décor with some degree scene with a high degree of detail.
 furniture and décor. of detail.
99
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME STAGE MANAGEMENT- CONTINUE RUBRIC
100

 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5
 CRITERIA 1 – 29 % 30 – 49 % 50 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 DESCRIPTOR NOT ACHIEVED MODERATELY ACHIEVED ADEQUATE ACHIEVEMENT SUBSTANTIAL ACHIEVEMENT MERITORIUS ACHIEVEMENT
 The candidate fails to The candidate submitted The candidate submitted The candidate submitted a The candidate submitted a stage manager
 submit a stage manager a stage manager script a stage manager script stage manager script with script with evidence of exceptional and
 script with evidence with some evidence of with evidence of technical evidence of technical aspects clear detail of technical aspects such as a
 of technical aspects technical aspects such as aspects such as a floor such as a floor plan, position floor plan, position of set and set pieces,
 Stage manager such as a floor plan, a floor plan, position of plan, position of set and of set and set pieces, doors, windows, blocking, entrances and
 prompt script position of set and set set and set pieces, doors, set pieces, doors, windows, doors, windows, blocking, exits, sound cues, light cues and special
 pieces, doors, windows, windows, blocking, blocking, entrances and entrances and exits, sound effects.
 blocking, entrances and entrances and exits, exits, sound cues, light cues cues, light cues and special
 exits, sound cues, light sound cues, light cues and special effects but not effects.
 cues and special effects. and special effects always clear or correct.
 The candidate fails to The candidate arrives for The candidate arrives for The candidate arrives for The candidate arrives for the interview,
 arrive for the interview the interview, submits the interview, submits a the interview, submits a submits a complete stage manager
 or to submit a stage an incomplete stage complete stage manager complete stage manager prompt script and provides insightful,
 manager prompt script manager prompt script prompt script and provides prompt script and provides well-motivated and thoughtful answers to
 Interview
 or fails to provide and provides brief and satisfactory answers to the satisfactory and well- the interview panels’ questions.
 satisfactory answers to unsatisfactory answers interview panels’ questions. motivated answers to the
 the interview panels’ to the interview panels’ interview panels’ questions.
 questions. questions.
 TECHNICAL THEATRE PROGRAMME
DESIGN ELEMENTS, DIRECTING, FILM MAKING, STAGE MANAGEMENT
ASSESSMENT FINAL EXAMINATION
RUBRIC: HOLISTIC

 LEVEL ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

 The candidate shows evidence of outstanding thought, planning and interpretation in the preparation of
 the programme. He/She is confident in the interview and shows a mature understanding of
 design/directing elements. He/She manages to balance creativity and an excellent understanding of
 technical elements. He/She is able to justify in detail the choices made. The candidate has developed an
 8
 excellent technical proficiency in his/her chosen technical field. The candidate has a passion for his/her
 Outstanding
 chosen technical field and conveys his/her vision to the examiner clearly and confidently. Evidence of
 Achievement
 research in his/her particular area of technical expertise is comprehensive. The school technical facilities
 (135–150)
 are utilised to good effect by the candidate and he/she is innovative, yet practical. Overall the proof of
 process is excellent and documents all aspects of the technical programme and process outstandingly well.
 The candidate gives an exceptionally engaging presentation of his/her technical programme in the
 interview. Reflection is of an excellent standard and the candidate critically reflects on his/her process.
 The candidate shows evidence of excellent thought, planning and interpretation in the preparation of the
 programme. He/She is confident in the interview and shows a mature understanding of design/directing
 elements. He/She manages to balance creativity and a good understanding of technical elements. He/She
 is able to justify the choices made. The candidate has developed technical proficiency in his/her chosen
 7
 technical field. The candidate has enthusiasm for his/her chosen technical field and conveys his/her vision
 Meritorious
 to the examiner clearly and confidently. Evidence of research in his/her particular area of technical
 Achievement
 expertise is detailed. The school technical facilities are utilised well by the candidate and he/she shows
 (120–134)
 some evidence of innovation. Overall the proof of process is good and documents all aspects of the
 technical programme and process very well. The candidate gives a presentation of his/her technical
 programme in the interview.
 Reflection is present and the candidate attempts critical reflection on his/her process.
 The candidate shows evidence of careful thought, planning and interpretation in the preparation of the
 programme. He/She is confident in the interview and shows a sound understanding of design/directing
 elements. The candidate shows creativity and has a satisfactory understanding of technical elements. He/
 She is able to justify most of the choices made. The candidate has developed some technical skill in his/ her
 6
 chosen technical field. The candidate is interested in his/her chosen technical field and conveys his/ her
 Substantial
 vision to the examiner clearly. Evidence of research in his/her particular area of technical expertise is sound.
 Achievement
 The school technical facilities are utilised by the candidate and he/she shows some evidence of application
 (105–119)
 of skills. Overall the proof of process is clear and documents aspects of the technical programme and
 process satisfactorily. The candidate is able to explain his/her technical programme at the interview.
 Reflection has been attempted but tends to be mechanical rather than a critical assessment of his/her
 process. Adequate Achievement
 The candidate shows evidence of thought, planning and some interpretation in the preparation of the
 programme. He/She shows some understanding of design/directing elements in the interview. The
 candidate has a satisfactory understanding of technical elements. He/She is able justify some of the choices
 made. The candidate has developed some technical ability in his/her chosen technical field. The candidate
 5
 shows an interest in his/her chosen technical field but is not able to convey his/her vision to the examiner
 Adequate
 clearly. Evidence of research in his/her particular area of technical expertise is limited. The school technical
 Achievement
 facilities are utilised by the candidate and he/she shows evidence of application of skills. Overall the proof
 (90–104)
 of process is present and documents aspects of the technical programme and process. The candidate is
 able to present his/her technical programme at the interview. Reflection has been attempted but tends to
 be mechanical and provides a list of what could have been done better rather than a critical assessment of
 his/ her process. Moderate Achievement
 The candidate shows evidence of thought and planning in the preparation of the programme. He/She has
 a limited understanding of design/directing elements. The candidate has some understanding of technical
 elements. He/She is not likely to be able justify the choices made. The candidate has some technical ability
 4 in his/her chosen technical field. The candidate is not able to convey his/her vision to the examiner clearly.
 Moderate Evidence of research in his/her particular area of technical expertise is minimal or not present. This aspect
 Achievement often relies on chunk of information taken from the internet. The school technical facilities are not well
 (75–89) utilised by the candidate and he/she lacks evidence of application of skills. Overall the proof of process of
 the technical programme is partly present. The candidate shows his/her technical programme at the
 interview but has to be encouraged to speak about the programme. Reflection is unlikely to have been
 attempted. Elementary Achievement

 101
 LEVEL ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

 The candidate shows little evidence of thought and planning in the preparation of the programme. He/She
 has a very limited understanding of design/directing elements. The candidate has a basic understanding of
 technical elements. He/She is not likely to be able justify the choices made. The candidate has little
3 technical ability in his/her chosen technical field. The candidate is not able to convey his/her vision to the
Elementary examiner. Evidence of research in his/her particular area of technical expertise is likely to be downloaded
Achievement information from the internet. The school technical facilities are not utilised by the candidate and he/she
(60–74) lacks evidence of application of skills. Overall the proof of process of the technical programme is partly
 present. The candidate shows his/her technical programme at the interview but has to be encouraged to
 speak about the programme and is not confident. Reflection is unlikely to have been attempted. Poor
 Achievement
 The candidate shows little or no evidence of thought and planning in the preparation of the programme.
 He/ She has no understanding of design/directing elements and very little understanding of technical
 elements. He/She is not likely to be able justify any choices made. The candidate has little technical ability
2
 in his/ her chosen technical field. The candidate is not able to convey his/her vision to the examiner.
Poor
 Evidence of research is likely to be downloaded information from the internet. The school technical
Achievement
 facilities are not utilised by the candidate and he/she lacks evidence of application of skills. Overall the
(45–59)
 proof of process of the technical programme is not documented. The candidate has his/her technical
 programme at the interview but is not able speak about the programme and is not confident. It is clear that
 the task has not been done properly. Reflection is not attempted.
 The candidate shows no evidence of thought and planning in the preparation of the programme. He/She
 has no understanding of design/directing elements and very little understanding of technical elements.
 He/She is not likely to be able justify any choices made. The candidate has little technical ability in his/her
 chosen technical field. The candidate is not able to convey an understanding of technical aspects to the
1
 examiner. If evidence of research is present it is likely to be downloaded information from the Internet.
Not Achieved
 The school technical facilities are not utilised by the candidate and he/she lacks evidence of application of
(0–44)
 skills. Overall the proof of process of the technical programme is not documented. The candidate has
 his/her technical programme at the interview but is not able to speak about the programme and is not
 confident.
 It is clear that the task has not been done properly. Reflection is not attempted.

102
 THEME PROGRAMME ANALYTICAL RUBRIC
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
 COGNITIVE LEVEL REMEBERING UNDERSTANDING APPLICATION ANALYSING ANALYSING- EVALUATION CREATING
 THINKING PROCESS FACTUAL FACTUAL CONCEPTUAL CONCEPTUAL PROCEDURAL PROCEDURAL META-GOGNITIVE
 SYMBOL G F E D C B A- A A+
 Little, no Basic, some, Sensible, Suitable, Significant, extensive, Excellent, admirable, Exceptional, superior,
 ACTION WORDS evidence, straight forward reasonable satisfactory, considerable meritorious unexpected,
 sufficient
 PERCENTAGE 0 – 29 % 30 – 39 % 40 - 49 % 50 -59 % 60 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 PREPARATION Demonstrates Knows the words, Reasonable Suitable Significant Excellent understanding, Exceptional
 little or merely understands the understanding of understanding, understanding, application, analysis,
 Words, genres, subtext, knows the words items and their the application application and application, analysis evaluation and understanding,
 interpretation, meaning, style, of all the items. subtexts, basic of the items and analysis of the items and evaluation original creation of the application, analysis,
 variation in items Displays limited confidence, their subtexts, is and their subtexts, of the items and presentation of the evaluation and superior
 confidence or evidence of confident. Applies is confident, good their subtexts, items and their subtexts, originality in the creation
 evidence of thought, planning good judgement of judgement of considerable estimable confidence of the presentation of the
 thought, planning and rehearsal thought, planning thought, planning confidence and and excellent judgement items and their subtexts,
 and rehearsal and rehearsal. and rehearsal. sound judgement of of thought, planning and Remarkable confidence
 thought, planning rehearsal. and superior judgement
 and rehearsal. of thought, planning and
 rehearsal.
 VOCAL PRODUCTION Demonstrates Some Reasonable Suitable Significant Excellent understanding, Exceptional
 little or basic understanding of understanding and understanding, understanding, application, analysis,
 Timing, rhythm, clarity, knowledge technical skills and good application of application application, analysis evaluation and original Understanding,
 projection, pitch, articulation, applied in vocal proficiency: vocal technical skills and and analysis of and evaluation of creation of technical application, analysis,
 pace, accent, control, volume, production interpretation proficiency. The technical skills and technical skills and skills and proficiency. evaluation and superior
 pause of texts and vocal interpretation proficiency. The proficiency. Vocal Vocal interpretation of originality in the creation
 vocal variation of text and vocal vocal interpretation interpretation of texts texts and vocal variation of the presentation
 breathing, modulation, of the technical skills
 accents, resonance, , is present and variation is of text and vocal and vocal variation are substantial.
 straight forward. reasonable. variation is are considerable and and proficiency. Vocal
 interpretation of text, vocal interpretation of texts
 variation acceptable. extensive.
 and vocal variation are
 exceptional
 SPACE Demonstrates Good confident Reasonable Satisfactory Extensive and Excellent, admirable Exceptional and
 little or basic in the use of understanding and and suitable significant understanding, superior understanding,
 Stage areas, levels and knowledge of stage space. application of the understanding, understanding, application, analysis, application, analysis,
 dimensions. Blocking stage space Understands the principles and the application and application, analysis evaluation and creative evaluation and creative
 principles of stage use of these in the analysis of the and evaluation of the use of the principles in use of the principles in
 space. stage space. principles and the principles and the use the stage space. the stage space.
 use of these in the of these in the stage
 stage space. space.
103
 THEME PROGRAMME ANALYTICAL RUBRIC
104

 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
 COGNITIVE LEVEL REMEBERING UNDERSTANDING APPLICATION ANALYSING ANALYSING- EVALUATION CREATING
 THINKING PROCESS FACTUAL FACTUAL CONCEPTUAL CONCEPTUAL PROCEDURAL PROCEDURAL META-GOGNITIVE
 SYMBOL G F E D C B A- A A+
 Little, no Basic, some, Sensible, Suitable, Significant, extensive, Excellent, admirable, Exceptional, superior,
 ACTION WORDS evidence, straight forward reasonable satisfactory, considerable meritorious unexpected,
 sufficient
 PERCENTAGE 0 – 29 % 30 – 39 % 40 - 49 % 50 -59 % 60 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 LINKS Demonstrates Straight forward Reasonable Satisfactory Extensive and Excellent, admirable Exceptional and
 little or merely understanding and and sensible and suitable significant understanding, superior understanding,
 Selection, creation, transition’s knowledge participation in understanding, understanding, understanding, application, application, application, participation
 length, style, genre, purpose components in links to enhance application and application and application and participation in, analysis, in, analysis, evaluation
 and meaning the use of links the meaning participation in of participation in participation in links evaluation and creative and creative use of the
 and flow of the links to enhance analysis of links to enhance the use of links to enhance links to enhance the
 programme the meaning to enhance the meaning and flow of the meaning and flow of meaning and flow of the
 and flow of the meaning and flow the programme the programme programme
 programme. of the programme
 UNDERSTANDING Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates knowledge
 little or basic knowledge and knowledge and knowledge, knowledge and knowledge and and understanding.
 Dramatic items, genre, knowledge of understanding of understanding understanding understanding. understanding. Displays Displays exceptional and
 style, conventions, meaning, the principles of the principles of and sensible and and sufficient Displays considerable excellent and admirable superior application,
 interpretation, characterisation Dramatic items Dramatic items fair application and satisfactory and significant application, evaluation evaluation and creative
 of the principles application of the application and and creative use of the use of the principles
 Dramatic items principles Dramatic evaluation of the principles Dramatic Dramatic items
 items principles Dramatic items
 items
 PHYSICAL WORK Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates
 little or basic knowledge and knowledge, knowledge, knowledge, knowledge, knowledge,
 Body awareness, posture, knowledge of understanding of understanding and understanding understanding understanding and understanding and
 relaxation, control, spatial physical skills physical skills in a fair application of and sufficient and extensive excellent and admirable exceptional and superior
 awareness, gesture, straight forward physical skills in a and satisfactory and significant application, analysis, application, analysis,
 expression, characterisation, manner sensible manner application and application, analysis evaluation and creativity evaluation and creativity
 facial expression, movement, analysis of physical and evaluation of in the use of physical in the use of physical
 focus, concentration, energy, skills. physical skills. skills. skills.
 proxemics, use of senses,
 emotional realisation
 EMOTIONAL CONNECTION Demonstrates Understands Understands and Understands, Understands, Understands, applies, Understands, applies,
 little or basic emotional applies emotional applies and applies, analyses and analyses, evaluates analyses, evaluates and
 Emotional memory, choose knowledge of connection and connection and analyses emotional evaluates emotional and displays excellent displays exceptional
 and select appropriate emotional the skills that this the skills that this connection and connection and the creativity in the creativity in the
 emotions, access authentic connection criteria consists criteria consists the skills that this skills that this criteria emotional connection emotional connection
 emotions, connect, internalise, of in a straight of in a reasonable criteria consists consists of in an and the skills that this and the skills that this
 express truthfully, control forward and basic manner of in a sufficient extensive manner criteria consists of in an criteria consists of in an
 manner manner admirable manner superior manner
 THEME PROGRAMME ANALYTICAL RUBRIC
 LEVEL 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
 COGNITIVE LEVEL REMEBERING UNDERSTANDING APPLICATION ANALYSING ANALYSING- EVALUATION CREATING
 THINKING PROCESS FACTUAL FACTUAL CONCEPTUAL CONCEPTUAL PROCEDURAL PROCEDURAL META-GOGNITIVE
 SYMBOL G F E D C B A- A A+
 Little, no Basic, some, Sensible, Suitable, Significant, extensive, Excellent, admirable, Exceptional, superior,
 ACTION WORDS evidence, straight forward reasonable satisfactory, considerable meritorious unexpected,
 sufficient
 PERCENTAGE 0 – 29 % 30 – 39 % 40 - 49 % 50 -59 % 60 – 69 % 70 – 79 % 80 – 100 %
 CONNECTION TO LISTENING Demonstrates Knows and Knows, Knows, understands Knows, understands Knows, understands Knows, understands
 little or basic understands understands and applies and applies analyses and applies analyses and applies analyses and
 Focus, engage, in the moment, knowledge of what connects applies the skills analyses the skills evaluates the skills evaluates the skills and evaluates the skills and
 pay attention to body connection to to listening is. and concepts of and concepts of and concepts of concepts of listening. concepts of listening.
 language, emotional tone, how listening Connects to the listening. Connects listening. Connects listening. Connects Creates original ways Creates original and
 words are spoken, receive, speaker in a to the speaker in to the speaker to the speaker in a of listening. Connects unexpected ways of
 hear (intentions, sub text, straight forward a reasonable and in a suitable and significant manner to the speaker in an listening. Connects to the
 motives, desires), consider, manner sensible manner sufficient manner excellent manner speaker in an exceptional
 don’t think of your lines or manner
 response
 DRAMATIC IMPACT OF Unengaging Elementary Moderately Adequately Substantially Commendable, engaging Exceptionally engaging
 PROGRAMME performance performance engaging engaging engaging performance and performance and
 and content. and content. performance performance performance content, Demonstrates content. Demonstrates
 Choice, content and themes Demonstrates Demonstrates and content. and content. and content. knowledge, knowledge,
 of the Dramatic items, little or basic knowledge and Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates understanding, understanding,
 performance of the candidate, knowledge of understanding knowledge, knowledge, knowledge, application, analysis, application, analysis,
 versatile in performance the skills and of the skills and understanding and understanding, understanding, evaluation and creative evaluation and creative
 (styles, genres, conventions, elements that elements to make application of the application and application, analysis use of the skills and and unexpected use of
 accents, acting and vocal skills, create an impact a fundamental skills and elements analysis of the skills and evaluation elements to make a the skills and elements
 unique approach in a performance impact to make reasonable and elements to of the skills and dramatic and excellent to make a impressive
 impact make a sufficient elements to make a impact. and remarkable impact.
 impact considerable impact Holistically integrated
 performance.
 PERFORMER’S IMPACT IN THE Unengaging Elementary level Moderate level Adequate level and Substantial level and Meritorious level and Outstanding level and
 PROGRAMME performance and fundamental and reasonable sufficient versatility. extensive versatility. excellent versatility. exceptional versatility.
 and content. versatility. versatility. Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates
 Versatility in genre, style, Demonstrates Demonstrates Demonstrates knowledge, knowledge, knowledge, knowledge,
 characterisation, little or basic understanding knowledge, understanding, understanding, understanding, understanding,
 Vocal and physical proficiency), knowledge of the skills understanding application and application, analysis application, analysis, application, analysis and
 of the skills and elements, and application analysis of the and evaluation evaluation and creative evaluation of the skills
 Skills and elements; and elements to create a of the skills and skills and elements, of the skills and use of the skills and and elements, to create
 performance energy, stage to create a performance, in a elements, to create to create a elements, to create elements, to create a performance, in a
 presence, uniqueness, performance straight forward a performance, in a performance, in a a performance, in a a performance, in a superior manner.
 creativity, synergy with other manner reasonable manner suitable manner significant manner commendable manner.
105

 candidates
 THEME PROGRAMME HOLISTIC RUBRIC

 LEVEL ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

 Compelling. Depth and sub-text. Has complete authenticity. Sustained entertainment and performance focus.
 Conveys sub-text fully. Interpretation of character, text and style is insightful. Technical aspects excellent.
 7 Engaging throughout. Maturity and commitment to work. Thought-processes are complex, interesting and
 90 – 100% completely engaging. Is an example of clear, focused, intelligent and motivated performance. A performance
 A+ which is mature in every way – choice, voice, movement or lack thereof, rhythm, emotional connection and
 characterisation – which all combines to produce work that is unforgettable and theatrically outstanding.

 Technically very good. Compelling. Sustained focus. Performance energy high. Ability to convey sub-text.
 Focused throughout. Clear understanding of performance and stagecraft. Interpretation of character, text and
 7 style always insightful. Demonstrates conflict. Builds dramatic tension and climatic moments effortlessly.
 80 – 89% Creates a definitive engaging character. Outstanding thought processes. Exceptional occupation of space.
 A Excellent understanding of work. Movement and/or stillness spot on – natural and engaging. Strong emotional
 connection. Exceptional vocal interpretation. Outstanding and motivated versatility.

 A highly competent perfomance which is engaging. Very good but lacks theatrical innovation. Candidate
 remains focused. Has theatrical tension at times but not sustained. Must have mature articulation, a sense of
 rhythm and pause. Interpretation of character insightful. Characterisation credible and appropriate.
 6 Theatrically good and energy evident. High degree of confidence and evidence of very good thought planning
 75 – 79% and rehearsal. Highly developed technical proficiency which is clever and sustained throughout. Demonstrates
 B+ emotional maturity with a good understanding of the work. Wide range of appropriate movement and/or
 stillness. Good emotional choices. Good intergration of voice and body. Connection with audience and/or
 partner is consistently engaging. Consistent creativity, insight, maturity and versatility.

 Confident and competent performance. Sincerity and sensitivity. Is engaging. Credible and appropriate
 6 characterisation – vocal and physically convincing and sustained. Engaging interaction with audience and/or
 70 – 74% other characters on stage. Limited theatricality. Good understanding of sub-text. Focus, energy and rhythm
 B sustained throughout. Mature but not very insightful use of space, movement and/or stilness. Emotional
 connection engaging. Pieces are versatile, creative, insightful and mature.

 Prepared for and committed to the performance. Sincere willingness to create good work. Characterisation is
 appropriate. Able to create sub-text adequately. Focus and energy not sustained throughout. Technical
 5 planning and choices demonstrated. Good performance. Vocal interpretation and variation well implemented
 65 – 69% and sustained. Insightful use of space. Use of movement/space creates appropriate atmosphere. Emotional
 C+ connection engaging at times. Technical choices shows creativity. Adequate performance but not theatrical.
 Choice of pieces are insightful and creative but not always mature.

 Prepared for performance and demonstrates commitment. Sub-text not adequately conveyed.
 Characterisation appropriate but may be contrived. Adequate performance. Variety in tone, pace and
 5 inflection. Adequate technical proficiency. Appropriate use of space. Sustained choices in terms of movement
 60 – 64% and/or stillness. Emotional connection evident but mostly forced. Delivery is consistent in terms of rhythm.
 C Good and appropriate use of design and technical elements. Connection with audience and/or partner
 adequately sustained. Versatility in programme is clear and demostrates some evidence of insight and
 creativity.
 Knows all words but understanding of content is superficial. Characterisation limited, lacks sufficient depth
 and complexity. Little emotional connection. Audible, with clear ideas of vocal interpretation and variation but
 4 not sustained. Candidate moderately equipped to implement technical skills. No clear focus. Evidence of clear
 50 – 59% movement and/or stillness planning but not sustained. Engaging at times. Limited emotional connection. Clear
 D design and technical choices but mostly unimaginative and intrusive. Clear choices in terms of audience/
 partner connection but largely inappropriate and inhibiting. Evidence of insight and creativity. Versatility in
 programme is evident but not challenging. Lacks dramatic application.

 106
 Evident that some preparation has taken place. Learner knows most of the words. Shows some confidence.
 Use of space partially justified. Unable to sustain focus throughout the performance. Forgets lines. Character
 3 undeveloped. Character has difficulty with internalization and characterisation not convincing. Structure and
 40 – 49% sub-text absent. A lack of engagement. Candidate unable to implement technical skills of performance.
 E Reasonably appropriate movement and/or stillness. Some vocal interpretation and variation. Rhythm slightly
 more mature but not sustained. Partial audience/partner connection. Some attempt at versatility.
 Performance is bland.

 LEVEL ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

 Not adequately prepared for perfomance. Incapable of sustaining focus, energy or characterisation.
 Characterisation superficial and/or inappropriate. Incapable of implementing technical performance skills.
 2 Shows very limited evidence of vocal interpretation and variation. No real understanding of work. Limited
 30 – 39% planning of movement and/or stillness. No emotional connection. A semblance of rhythmic interpretation but
 F not sustained. Design and technical elements not evident or cannot be justified. Little or no versatility in
 programme. Hardly any evidence of connection with audience and/or partner . Forgets lines. No creativity.

 Candidate not prepared for assessment. Lines not learnt. No confidence and shows very little evidence of
 1 thought, planning and rehearsal. No evidence of vocal interpretation and no vocal variation. Demonstrates no
 0 – 29% understanding of the work and there is no interpretation and/or characterisation. No appropriate movement
 F or stillness incorporated. No emotional connection. No awareness of rhythm. No design or technical elements
 incorporated. No connection to audience and/or partner. No versatility demonstrated. No creativity or insight.

General
This Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement should be read in conjunction with the:
4.9.1 National Policy Pertaining to the Programme and Promotion Requirements of the National Curriculum
Statement Grades R-12; (NPPPR)

 107
 4. MUSIC
SECTION 4

4.1 INTRODUCTION TO ASSESSMENT
Assessment is a planned and continuous process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the
performance of learners, using various forms of assessment. It involves four steps: generating and collecting
evidence of achievement, evaluating this evidence, recording the findings and using the information to understand
and thereby assist the learner’s development in order to improve the process of teaching and learning.
Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning). In both cases,
regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance the learning experience.

4.1.1 Assessment in Music
Grade 10 and 11
There are five formal assessment tasks. The five tasks make up 80% of the final mark:
• SBA tasks constitute 60% of the final mark.
• Two PATs of 50 marks each constitute 20% of the final mark.
The remaining 20% is obtained from the final examination.
• The written examination (Paper 1 and Paper 2) constitutes 10% of the final mark.
• The practical examination (Paper 3) constitutes 10% of the final mark.

Grade 12
There are four formal assessment tasks. The four tasks make up 50% of the final mark:
• SBA tasks constitute 25% of the final mark.
• Two PATs of 50 marks each constitute 25% of the final mark.
The remaining 50% is obtained from the final external examination.
• The written examination (Paper 1 and Paper 2) constitutes 25% of the final mark.
• The practical examination (Paper 3) constitutes 25% of the final mark.

4.2 INFORMAL OR DAILY ASSESSMENT
Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on individual learner’s achievement
that can be used to improve learning.
Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations, discussions,
practical demonstrations, learner-teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, etc. Although it need not
be recorded, it provides feedback to the learners, and it informs planning for teaching. Therefore, it should not be
seen as separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom. Although the results of daily assessment
tasks are not taken into account for promotion and certification purposes; they assist learners to perform better
when it comes to formal assessment tasks and examinations.

 108
 All Topics taught/covered should be informally assessed before the completion of the formal tasks.
Learners can be involved in the marking of informal assessment tasks by way of either self or peer assessment. This
is important as it allows learners to learn from their peers and to reflect on their own performance.

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT
All tasks that are on the Programme of Assessment (PoA) are regarded as formal assessment. Formal assessment
tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and certification purposes. They are subject
to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance.
Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a
grade. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, practical tasks, projects, oral presentations,
demonstrations, performances, etc.
Teachers must expose their learners to different cognitive level questions when assessing them. In that way they
would be catering for all learners’ abilities, while also stimulating critical thinking.

4.3.1 School-Based Assessment (SBA) The
SBA consists of the following:

4.3.1.1 Grades 10 and 11
 TERM SBA MARK PAT MARK TERM TOTAL
 1. Music Literacy 40
 GMK 40
 Comprehension 20
 100
 2. No Mid-year Examination 0 PAT 1: Composition 50 150
 Test (Practical) 100 or Arrangement or
 Improvisation

 Music Literacy 40
 3. PAT 2: Concert 50
 GMK 40 Performance
 150
 Comprehension 20
 SBA (300/3) 100 PAT 100
 4. Final Examination: 300
 P1 - Music Literacy and GMK
 P2 - Music Comprehension
 P3 - Practical Exam (3 pieces, technical, aural, sight
 reading) 150
 150
 SBA:
 TEST (100) + Practical Test (100) +
 TEST (100) = (300/3 = 100 ) = 60%

 PAT:
 (50 + 50 = 100) = 20%

 Final Exam:
 Paper 1 and Paper 2 = 150 (10%)
 Paper 3 (Practical) = 150 (10%)
 TOTAL =300 (20%)

 109
 4.3.1.2 Grade 12

 TERM SBA MARK PAT MARK TOTAL

 1. Music Literacy 40 PAT 1: Composition 50 150
 or Arrangement or
 GMK 40 Improvisation

 Comprehension 20

 2. No Mid-Year Examination: 0 PAT 2: Concert 50 50
 Performance

 3. Preliminary Examination: 120 300
 P1 -Music Literacy and GMK 30
 P2- Music Comprehension 150
 P3- Practical Exam (3 pieces, technical, aural, sight
 reading)

 SBA (400/4) 100 PAT 100

 4. SBA:
 TEST (100) + Prelim Exam (300) = (400/4 = 100) = 25%
 PAT:
 50 + 50 = (100) = 25%

 Final Exam:
 Paper 1 and Paper 2 = 150 (25%)
 Paper 3 (Practical) = 150 (25%)
 TOTAL = 300 (50%)

4.3.1.3 Practical Assessment Tasks (PATs)
Practical Assessment Tasks correspond closely with the curriculum content and form part of teaching and
assessment. They must be used as on-going assessment tools and serve to ensure that all aspects of the curriculum
are covered.
For concert performance (PAT 2) the following must be taken into cognisance:
• Concert performance can be planned in groups.
• Each learner must perform one piece in a concert or performance class. This piece must be polished and
 performance-ready.
• The concert performance must be assessed by at least two music teachers/specialists.
• Evidence of the assessment of the concert performance, written Programme Notes and Business Plan must
 be placed in each learner’s file.

 110
 4.4 WEIGHTING OF TERM MARKS FOR MUSIC
3.4.1 Grades 10 and 11

 TERM 1 2 3 4

 TASK TASK 1 TASK 2 Task 3 TASK 4 TASK 5 TASK 5 TASK 6

 AREA OF Written PAT 1 Test Written Practical Written PAT 1 & 2
 Test (Practical) Test PAT 2 Exam Exam
 ASSESSMENT

 MARK 100 50 100 100 50 150 150 100

 WEIGHTING PER 100% 100% 100%
 TERM
 WEIGHTING PER 20% 10% 20% 20% 10% 10% 10% 20%
 ANNUM
 SBA: 300 marks/3 FINAL EXAM: 300 PAT: 100
 TOTAL = 100 = 60% marks x 2/3 = 200 = marks = 20%
 20%

3.4.2 Grade 12

 GRADE 12
 TERM 1 2 3 4

 TASK TASK 1 TASK 2 TASK 3 TASK 3 TASK 4 TASK 5 (FINALS)
 Prelim Examination
 AREA OF Written PAT 1 PAT 2 Practical Written Practical Written PAT 1 & 2
 ASSESSMENT test exam exam exam exam

 MARK 100 50 50 150 150 150 150 100

 WEIGHTING PER
 TERM 100% 100% 100% 50% 50% 100%

 WEIGHTING PER
 ANNUM 25% 25% 25%

 SBA: 400 marks/4 = 100 FINAL EXAM: 300 marks x PAT 100
 TOTAL = 25% 2/3 = 200 marks =
 = 50% 25%

 111
 4.5 PRACTICAL EXAMINATION (GRADE 10 – 12)
The following pertain to practical examination:
3.5.1 Presentation of pieces
 3.5.1.1 IAM
For modern constructs, three pieces from different styles must be presented.
For indigenous music, three pieces from different cultures must be presented.
 3.5.1.2 Jazz
Three pieces from different styles must be presented.
 3.5.1.3 WAM
Three pieces from different Style periods must be presented.
3.5.2 Solo performance
A music score or lead sheet must be provided to the examiners. For IAM a written structure or guideline for the
performance must be provided.
3.5.3 Ensemble
• An ensemble must consist of 2 or more learners.
• Each performer (learner) must play an independent part which is not doubled by another performer’s part.
• A music score or lead sheet for the examined learner/s must be provided to the examiners. For IAM a written
 structure or guideline for the performance must be provided. It is not necessary to provide scores for
 unexamined members of the ensemble.

3.5.4 Improvisation
• A music score or lead sheet indicating the melody/rhythm/chords to be improvised from must be provided
 to the examiners.
• Improvisation must be spontaneous; therefore, the improvised part must not be scored.
• The examination improvisation must be different from the PAT improvisation.
Refer to Annexures A – H5 for reporting tools and rubrics.

 112
 3.5.5 Breakdown of practical examination
Practical examination is broken down as follows:

 Maximum
 Practical component Marks

 Technical Development: 30

 · Scales, arpeggios/voice exercises (10) ,

 · Study (20)

 *Technical exercises must be taken from one list of an official external examining body
 *The standard for IAM Technical exercises will be determined by DBE (Curriculum

 Performance Pieces: 90

 IAM Jazz WAM

 Piece 1 Piece 1
 Own choice (solo piece) / Own choice (solo piece) / Piece 1
 Improvisation/ Ensemble (30) Improvisation (30) Own choice (solo piece) (30)

 Piece 2 Piece 2 Piece 2
 Own choice (solo piece/ Own choice (solo piece/ Own choice (solo piece/
 ensemble) (30) ensemble) (30) ensemble) (30)

 Piece 3 Piece 3 Piece 3
 Ensemble (30) Ensemble (30) Ensemble (30)

 Sight-reading: 15

 · Unaccompanied reading of at least 12 bars

 *Sight-reading must be comparable to Grade 5 of an external examining body
 *For IAM the standard of sight-reading will be determined by DBE (Curriculum)

 Aural Tests: 15

 · Sight-singing (6)

 · Clapping of a played rhythm (6)

 · Singing of triads (3)

 · For IAM and Jazz/Afrophonia, Sing two of the following: major 7th, minor 7th, dominant 7th, half-
 diminished and diminished 7th.

 TOTAL 150

 113
 3.6 WRITTEN EXAMINATION (GRADES 10 – 12)
 3.6.1 Music Paper 1

Duration: 3 hours

Section Topic Maximum marks

Section A Music Literacy 60

Section B General Music Knowledge 60

 TOTAL 120

 3.6.2 Music Paper 2

Duration: 1 hour 30 min

Section Topic Maximum marks
Section A Aural 10

Section B Recognition 12

Section C Form and analysis 8

 TOTAL 30

This paper must be written whilst listening to soundtracks on an examination CD. Each track will be played for a
specified number of times.
For Grade 12 final examination, every centre will be provided with an audio CD, which must be played to the
candidates during the examination. The audio CD must be delivered to the school a day before the examination so
that it can be checked by the teacher in the presence of the Chief Invigilator of the school.
In the case of more than one stream being offered, the following must apply:
• The school must inform the department to ensure that CD’s tallying the chosen streams are sent.
• The school must prepare separate examination rooms for each stream.
Background knowledge from Grade 10 and 11 may be assessed in Grade 12.

 114
 3.6.3 Cognitive levels
Formal assessments must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners as shown below: It must be
emphasised that learners must be exposed to the different cognitive levels during assessment. This caters for varied
learners’ abilities, while also stimulating critical thinking.

 COGNITIVE LEVELS ACTIVITY PERCENTAGE OF TASK

 Higher order Analysing, evaluating, creating 30%

 Middle order Understanding, applying 40%

 Lower order Knowledge, remembering 30%

3.7 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks across all subjects in a school
throughout a term.
3.7.1 Grades 10 and 11

 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT AND WEIGHTING OF TASKS

 SBA - DURING YEAR END-OF-YEAR EXAMINATION PAT

 60% 20% 20%

 Test (100) Written Examination Paper 3: Practical PAT 1 – 50
 Test (Practical) (100) Paper 1 – 120 Marks Examination -150 PAT 2 – 50
 Test (100) Paper 2 – 30 Marks TOTAL: 150 TOTAL: 100
 TOTAL: 300 TOTAL: 150

 100 marks = 60% 100 marks = 10% 100 marks = 10% 100 marks = 20%

 115
 3.7.1.1 Grade 10 and 11: Programme of assessment per term
 TERM SBA MARK PAT MARK TERM TOTAL
 1. Music Literacy 40
 GMK 40
 Comprehension 20
 100
 2. No Mid-year Examination 0 PAT 1: Composition 50 150
 Test (Practical) 100 or Arrangement or
 Improvisation

 Music Literacy 40
 3. PAT 2: Concert 50
 GMK 40 Performance
 150
 Comprehension 20
 SBA (500/5) 100 PAT 100
 4. Final Examination: 300
 P1 - Music Literacy and GMK
 P2 - Music Comprehension
 P3 - Practical Exam (3 pieces, technical, aural, sight-
 reading) 150
 150
 SBA:
 TEST (100) + Practical Test (100) +
 TEST (100) = (300/3 = 100 ) = 60%

 PAT:
 (50 + 50 = 100) = 20%

 Final Exam:
 Paper 1 and Paper 2 = 150 (10%)
 Paper 3 (Practical) = 150 (10%)
 TOTAL = 300 (20%)

3.7.2 Grade 12

 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT AND WEIGHTING OF TASKS

 SBA - DURING YEAR END-OF-YEAR EXAMINATION PAT

 25% 50% 25%

 Test (100) Written examination Paper 3: Practical PAT 1 – 50
 Preliminary Examination Paper 1 – 120 Marks examination -150 PAT 2 – 50
 (120 + 30 + 150) = 300 Paper 2 – 30 Marks TOTAL: 150 TOTAL: 100
 TOTAL: 400 TOTAL: 150
 100 marks= 25% 100 marks= 25% 100 marks= 25% 100 marks= 25%

 116
 3.7.2.1 Grade 12: Programme of assessment per term

 TERM SBA MARK PAT MARK TOTAL

 1. Music Literacy 40 PAT 1: Composition 50 150
 or Arrangement or
 GMK 40 Improvisation

 Comprehension 20

 2. No Mid-Year Examination: 0 PAT 2: Concert 50 50
 Performance

 3. Preliminary Examination: 120 300
 P1 -Music Literacy and GMK 30
 P2- Music Comprehension 150
 P3- Practical Exam (3 pieces, technical, aural, sight
 reading)

 SBA (400/4) 100 PAT 100

 4. SBA:
 TEST (100) + Prelim Exam (300) = (400/4 = 100) = 25%

 PAT:
 50 + 50 = (100 ) = 25%

 Final Exam:
 Paper 1 and Paper 2 = 150 (25%)
 Paper 3 (Practical) = 150 (25%)
 TOTAL = 300 (50%)

3.8 RECORDING AND REPORTING
Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment
task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in the Curriculum and
Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual
progression within a grade and her or his readiness to progress or for being promoted to the next grade. Records
of learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners in the teaching
and learning process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other stakeholders.
Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’ meetings, school
visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters. Teachers in all grades
report in percentages against the subject. The various achievement levels and their corresponding percentage
ranges are as shown in the table below.

 117
 3.8.1 Codes and percentages for recording and reporting

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE

 7 Outstanding achievement 80 - 100

 6 Meritorious achievement 70 - 79

 5 Substantial achievement 60 - 69

 4 Adequate achievement 50 - 59

 3 Moderate achievement 40 - 49

 2 Elementary achievement 30 - 39

 1 Not achieved 0 - 29

3.9 MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT
Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation
should be implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate
moderation practices must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

 LEVEL MODERATION REQUIREMENTS

 School · The programme of assessment should be submitted to the subject head and school
 management team before the start of the academic year for moderation purposes.
 · Each task which is to be used as part of the programme of assessment should be
 submitted to the subject head for moderation before learners attempt the task.
 · Teacher portfolios and evidence of learner performance should be moderated twice
 a year by the head of the subject or her/his delegate.

 Cluster/district/region Teacher portfolios and a sample of evidence of learner performance must be
 moderated twice during the first three terms.

 Provincial/national Teacher portfolios and a sample of evidence of learner performance must be
 moderated once a year.

3.10 GENERAL

This document should be read in conjunction with:
• National Policy Pertaining to the Programme and Promotion Requirements (NPPPPR) of the National
 Curriculum Statement (NCS) Grades R-12; and
• National Protocol for Assessment (NPA) Grades R-12.

 118
 ANNEXURE A
PRACTICAL EXAMINATION REPORT (FINAL/PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION)
 Exam Number: Name of Candidate:

 School:

 Date of Examination: Instrument:

 Title and Composer Comments Marks Total

 Piece 1 30

 Piece 2 30

 Piece 3 30

 Technical Work 30

 Sight-reading 15

 Aural 15

 TOTAL 150

 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA FOR PIECES

 Examiners:1 Fluency 10
 2.
 Moderator
 General comments:

 Accuracy 10

 Stylistic Sense 30

 Musical Understanding 20

 General:
 · Tone production/Touch
 · Intonation 30
 · Technical Competence
 · Appropriate Tempo
 Total 100

 TOTAL /150 =

 119
 ANNEXURE B

TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT
SCALES AND ARPEGGIOS: TOTAL 5 x 2 = 10
(2 MARKS EACH)
 1. Major scale

 2. Minor Scale

 3. Chromatic scale

 4. Major arpeggio

 5. Minor arpeggio

TOTAL
STUDY: TOTAL = 20

TOTAL
 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA OF SCALE/ARPEGGIO

2 Fluent, accurate and even with a competent technical facility
 High quality of tone and secure intonation
 Prompt response

1 Technically secure with occasional errors resulting from stress
½ Quality of tone and intonation mostly reliable
 Generally prompt responses

 1 Mostly Fluent, accurate but some unevenness of technique
 Some degree of variety in quality of tone and secure intonation
 Hesitant and uncertain responses

½ Limited knowledge of the structure with frequent errors in notes and technically incompetent
 Poor tone quality and intonation
 Frequent restarts and little concept of key

 0 No sense of fluency
 Many serious errors
 No sense of structure

 120
 ANNEXURE C
TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT
VOCAL AND AFRICAN/ PERCUSSION INSTRUMENTS EXERCISES: TOTAL 5 x 2 = 10
(2 MARKS EACH)
1. 2 Fluent, accurate and even with a competent
2. technical facility
3. High quality of tone and secure intonation
4. Prompt response
5.
 1½ Technically secure with occasional errors
 resulting from stress
TOTAL
 Quality of tone and intonation mostly reliable
Vocal exercises may be asked on various suitable pitches.
 Generally prompt responses
STUDY: TOTAL = 20
 1 Mostly fluent but some unevenness of
TOTAL technique and tempi
 Some degree of variety in quality of tone and
 intonation
 Hesitant and uncertain responses with
 occasional restarts

 ½ Limited knowledge of the structure with
 frequent errors in notes and technically
 incompetent
 Poor tone quality and intonation
 Frequent restarts and little concept of key

 No sense of fluency
 0 Many serious errors
 No sense of structure

 121
 ANNEXURE D

 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA FOR PREPARED PIECES AND ENSEMBLE
 Total marks out of 90 (3 pieces = 30 marks each)

Fluency Accuracy Stylistic sense Musical understanding General
10 10 30 20 30

(9-10) (9-10) (27-30) (18-20) (27-30)
EXCELLENT EXCELLENT EXCELLENT EXCELLENT EXCELLENT
Accurate, fluent and Authoritative Clear Excellent projection and Excellent tone production,
precise playing accurate playing understanding of communication of the touch, intonation, technical
 the required style meaning of the music competence and suitable
 tempo

(7-8) (7-8)
GOOD GOOD (21–26) (14-17) (21–26)
Mainly accurate and A good level of GOOD GOOD GOOD
fluent playing accuracy Good sense of Good understanding and Good tone production, touch,
 performance in communication of the intonation, technical
 appropriate style meaning of the music competence and tempo

(5-6) (5-6) (15-20) (10-13) (15-20)
ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE
Essentially accurate Generally A fair sense of the Partially successful in Fair tone production,
with adequate accurate playing required style communicating the touch, intonation, technical
fluency meaning of the music competence and tempo

(3-4) (3-4) (9-14) (6-9) (9-14)
PASSABLE PASSABLE PASSABLE PASSABLE PASSABLE
Tentative tempo, Limited level of Performance Little sense of musical Some idea of tone production,
pulse often not clear, accuracy shaky and lacking understanding touch,
frequent hesitations a sense of style intonation, technical
 competence and tempo

(1-2) (1-2) (6-8) (2-5) (6-8)
WEAK WEAK WEAK WEAK WEAK
Very poor continuity Very little Style just vaguely Lacking musical sense Lacking tone production,
with frequent accuracy, many discernible touch, intonation, technical
stumbles, restarts errors competence and tempo
and/or stoppages

(0) (0) (0-5) (0-1) (0-5)
UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE
Cannot play the piece So inaccurate that Unacceptable with Unable to communicate No sense of tone production,
 music cannot be no sense of style the meaning of the music touch, intonation, technical
 followed competence and tempo

 122
 ANNEXURE E

ASSESSMENT CRITERIA FOR SIGHT-READING
Total marks out of 15

Style & interpretation Accuracy Fluency
5 5 5

(5) (5) (5)
EXCELLENT EXCELLENT EXCELLENT
Musically persuasive, convincing shaping of Accurate reading of notes, rests, A consistent and suitable tempo
phrases, artful articulation and dynamics phrasing, articulation and dynamics Fluent performance

(4) (4) (4)
GOOD GOOD GOOD
Some understanding of phrasing, Mostly accurate reading of notes, Tempo largely maintained
articulation and dynamics rests, phrasing, articulation and
 dynamics

(3) (3) (3)
ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE
Satisfactory control of some aspects of Acceptable level of accuracy in Acceptable tempo
musical style reading of notes, rests, phrasing, Fluency acceptable
 articulation and dynamics
(2) (2) (2)
WEAK WEAK WEAK
Little attention to details of musical Mostly inaccurate reading of notes, Inconsistent tempo
interpretation rests, phrasing, articulation and Fluency flawed
 dynamics
(0-1) (0-1) (0-1)
UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE
No attention to musical detail Performance abandoned or curtailed Static tempo
 No fluency

 123
 ANNEXURE F

SAMPLE AURAL ASSESSMENT
AURAL COMPONENT: (15)
QUESTION PAPER FOR EXAMINER ONLY
1. Sight Singing (6)

 (Student may study sight singing for 30 seconds. Adjust doh if necessary.)

2. Clapping the rhythm of a musical phrase played by the examiner (6) (Play entire phrase twice.)

3. Singing of triads/chords (3) 3.1

 3.2

IAM/JAZZ Option

 3.1 3.2

TOTAL MARK 15

 124
 ANNEXURE G 1
CONCERT PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT TOOLS

 PAT 2: CONCERT PERFORMANCE

 COMPONENT MAXIMUM MARK LEARNER’S MARK

 PERFORMANCE 20

 PROGRAMME NOTES 10

 BUSINESS PLAN 20

 TOTAL 50
 Record of Assessment: Performance TOTAL: 20
 Learner’s name: Date:
 Composer and title: Instrument:

 PERFORMANCE CRITERIA MAXIMUM MARK LEARNER’S MARK

 Fluency 10

 Accuracy 10

 Stylistic sense 30

 Musical understanding/Interpretation 20

 General: 30
 • Tone production/Touch
 • Intonation
 • Technical competence • Appropriate
 tempo
 • Stage presence:
 ➢ Entry onto a stage
 ➢ Conducting themselves on stage
 ➢ Managing performance stress
 ➢ Acknowledgement of audience and applause �Exit
 off stage

 Subtotal: 100

 Converted: Performance 20

 125
 ANNEXURE G-2
CONCERT PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT TOOLS (CONTINUED)
Record of Assessment: PROGRAMME NOTES TOTAL = 10
Learner’s name: Date:
Composer and title: Instrument:
INSTRUCTIONS
1. Write brief programme notes on the piece performed in the concert.
2. The information should include reference to the composer, the form and relevant style characteristics of the
 piece.
3. Marks will be awarded for content, use of language and presentation.

Comments:

Teacher 1: Name
 Signature
Teacher 2: Name Signature

Grade 10: 80 - 100 words
Grade 11: 100 - 120 words
Grade 12: 120 - 150 words

 126
 ANNEXURE G-3
CONCERT PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT TOOLS (CONTINUED)

 ASSESSMENT TOOL FOR PROGRAMME NOTES

 Content Language and Presentation
 20 10

 (18-20) (9-10)
 EXCELLENT EXCELLENT
 Coherent and comprehensive

 (14-17) (7-8)
 GOOD GOOD
 Mostly coherent, and detailed

 (10-13) (5-6)
 AVERAGE AVERAGE
 Fairly coherent with some detail

 (6-9) (3-4)
 ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE
 Some coherence but lacking detail

 (0-5) (0-2)
 UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE
 No sense and incomplete

 30/3 = 10

 127
 ANNEXURE G-4
CONCERT PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT TOOLS (CONTINUED)

 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA FOR CONCERT PERFORMANCE PIECE
 Total = 20

 Fluency Accuracy Stylistic sense Musical General
 10 10 30 understanding/ 30
 interpretation
 20

 (9-10) (9-10) (27-30) (18 – 20) (27-30)
 EXCELLENT EXCELLENT EXCELLENT EXCELLENT EXCELLENT
 Accurate, fluent and Authoritative, Clear Excellent projection Excellent tone production,
 precise playing accurate playing understanding of and communication touch, intonation, technical
 the required style of the meaning of competence and suitable
 music tempo, stage presence

 (7-8) (7-8) (21-26) (14-17) (21-26)
 GOOD GOOD GOOD GOOD GOOD
 Mainly accurate and A good level of Good sense of Good understanding Good tone production, touch,
 fluent playing accuracy performance in an and communication intonation, technical
 appropriate style of the meaning of the competence, tempo, stage
 music presence

 (5-6) (5-6) (15-20) (10–13) (15-20)
 AVERAGE AVERAGE AVERAGE AVERAGE AVERAGE
 Essentially accurate Generally accurate A fair sense of the Partially successful in Fair tone production, touch,
 with adequate playing required style communicating intonation, technical
 fluency the meaning of the competence, tempo, stage
 music presence

 (3-4) (3-4) (9-14) (6-9) (9-14)
 ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE ACCEPTABLE
 Tentative tempo, Limited level of Performance shaky Little musical Some idea of tone production,
 pulse often not clear, accuracy and lacking a sense understanding touch, intonation, technical
 frequent hesitations of style competence, tempo, stage
 presence

 (0-2) (0-2) (0-8) (0-5) (0-8)
 UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE UNACCEPTABLE
 Very poor continuity Very little accuracy, Style just vaguely Lacking musical sense Lacking tone production,
 with frequent many errors discernible touch, intonation, technical
 stumbles, restarts competence, tempo, stage
 and/or stoppages presence

 128
 ANNEXURE G-5
CONCERT PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT TOOLS (CONTINUED)

 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA FOR BUSINESS PLAN

 • Overall Budget/Costing

 • Venue (Hiring equipment, seating, Stage management, stage layout, microphones, amps,

 catering, costing, etc.)
 • Invitations (Design, printing, distribution, guest list, costing)

 • Posters (Design, printing, distribution, costing)

 • Tickets (Design, printing, distribution, costing) 20

 • Programme (Repertoire, Design, Layout, Printing, costing)

 • Media (Digital spaces- Social Media, Newspaper, SABC)

 • Music Industry (Copyright, Sound and lighting, costing)

 • Recording of Event

 • Rehearsals (Scheduling, Venue, Number of rehearsals

 • Preparation (Concert Etiquette-Dress code, punctuality, professionalism)

 TOTAL 20

 129
 5. VISUAL ARTS
5.1 Introduction
Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the
performance of learners, using various methods. This involves four steps:
• generating and collecting evidence of achievement;
• evaluating this evidence;
• recording the findings and
• using this information to understand and thereby assist the learner’s development in order to improve the
 process of learning and teaching.

Assessment involves activities that are undertaken throughout the year. In grades 10-12 assessment comprises two
different but related activities: informal daily assessment (assessment for learning) and formal assessment
(assessment of learning).

5.2 Informal or daily assessment
• Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information regarding a learner’s
 achievement that can be used to improve their learning.
• Informal assessment is crucial in Visual Arts. It should occur on a daily basis and be a substantive conversation
 between the teacher and learner to facilitate feedback and feed forward especially of practical work. Informal
 assessment is the daily monitoring of learners’ progress and can be done through conversation, critique
 sessions, questions and answers, short written activities completed during the lesson, open-book tests,
 homework exercises, case studies, etc. It should not be seen as separate from the learning activities taking
 place in the classroom. Learners or teachers can mark some of these assessment tasks. Self-assessment and
 peer assessment actively involve learners in assessment. This is important as it allows learners to learn from
 and reflect on their own performance.
• The results of the informal assessment tasks are not formally recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. In
 such instances, a simple checklist may be used to record this assessment. However, teachers may use the
 learners’ performance in these assessment tasks to provide verbal or written feedback to learners, the school
 management team and parents. This is particularly important if barriers to learning or poor levels of
 participation are encountered.
• The results of informal assessment tasks are not taken into account for promotion and certification purposes.

 130
 5.3 Formal assessment

5.3.1 Formal Assessment Requirements

All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as formal
assessment. Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and
certification purposes. All formal assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance
and to ensure that appropriate standards are maintained
Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a
grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include projects, oral presentations,
demonstrations, performances, tests, examinations and practical tasks. Formal assessment tasks form part of a
year-long formal programme of Assessment in each grade and subject.
The forms of assessment used should be appropriate to the age and the developmental level of the learners in the
grade. The assessment tasks should be carefully designed to cover the content of the subject. The design of these
tasks should therefore ensure that a variety of content is assessed. Objectives, topics and content in the subject
should be used to inform the planning and development of assessment tasks.

The Formal Assessment Requirements for Visual Arts are as follows:

GRADES 10-11

7 formal assessment tasks must be completed per year.
• Task 1 – 5 will make up the SBA mark
• Task 6: (PAT) Exhibition
• Task 7: End of Year examination

The promotion weightings for Grades 10-11:
 SBA = 60%
 PAT = 20%
 Test = 20% (P1 theory = 10% and P2 practical = 10%)

 131
 ANNUAL PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT FOR VISUAL ARTS – GRADES 10-11
 SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT 60%
 EXAMINATION 20%
 150 Marks + 150 Marks + 50 Marks = 350 converted to 100 Marks (SBA)

 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 150 MARKS 150 MARKS 50 MARKS 150 MARKS
 TASK 7
 TASK 1 TASK 3 TASK 5
 END OF YEAR EXAM
 THEORY TEST THEORY TEST THEORY TEST
 P1 TEST
 (summative assessment) (summative assessment) (summative assessment)
 (summative assessment)
 50 Marks 50 Marks 50 Marks
 50 Marks
 TASK 2 TASK 4 TASK 7 TASK 7
 CONCEPTUALISATION CONCEPTUALISATION END OF YEAR EXAM END OF YEAR EXAM
 Topic 1 Topic 1 P2 CONCEPTUALISATION P2 ARTWORK
 (formative assessment) (formative assessment) (summative assessment) (summative assessment)
 100 Marks 100 Marks (50 Marks) (50 Marks)
 PAT 20%
 TASK 6

 PRACTICAL ASSESSMENT TASK (PAT)
 (Continuous assessment from Term 1 – Term 3)
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 ARTWORK 1 ARTWORK 2 PAT EXHIBITION
 PAT: EXHIBITION
 Topic 2 Topic 2 PROCESS
 (summative assessment)
 (formative assessment) (formative assessment) (Internally assessed in Term
 100 MARKS
 100 Marks 100 Marks 4)

 25% 25% 50%
 Internally Assessed Artwork (Terms 1 + 2) = 50 Marks PROCESS & EXHIBITION = 50 Marks
 100%

GRADE 12
6 formal assessment tasks must be completed per year.
• Task 1 – 4 will make up the SBA mark.
• Task 5: (PAT) Exhibition
• Task 6: End of Year examination
For Visual Arts, TWO practical projects must be completed in Term 1 and Term 2. Each consisting of (Topic 1,
Sourcebook and Topic 2, Artwork). Both practical projects are internally set and assessed by the teacher per term.
The marks are recorded as follow:
• Topic 1 (Sourcebook) is recoded as part of the SBA mark.
• Topic 2 (Artwork) is recorded as part of the PAT mark and only reflected at the end of the year.
SBA: The Sourcebook (Topic 1) of the TWO practical projects together with TWO theory assessment tasks make up
the total SBA mark. The SBA weighting is 25% of the year mark.
 132
 THE END-OF-YEAR ASSESSMENT consist of THREE parts and make up the remaining 75% of the year mark:
• A written theory paper (P1), focusing on Topic 3.
• A practical examination Paper (P2), focusing on Topic 1 and 2.
• The PAT which is presented in the form of an exhibition at the end of the year. The exhibition consists of the
 artworks completed during term 1 and 2 (minimum requirement), plus artwork/s that show further extension
 and development of theme/s investigated. The artworks (Topic 2) of term 1 and 2 for the PAT exhibition are
 internally assessed in each term and recorded as part of the PAT mark in term 4. The mark for the PAT
 exhibition in term 4 cover the remainder of the mark.
• the formal assessment (SBA) is internally set and marked, but externally moderated.
• the end-of-year examination papers [theory (P1) and practical (P2)] and final PAT exhibition are externally
 set, marked and moderated.
Table 1b Formal Assessment Grade 12

 FORMAL ASSESSMENT ARTS SUBJECTS
 INTERNAL EXTERNAL
 SBA PAT EXHIBITION PRACTICAL EXAMINATION THEORY EXAMINATION
 25% 25% 25% 25%
 100 Marks 100 Marks 100 Marks 100 Marks
 TOTAL 400 MARKS
 ANNUAL PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT FOR VISUAL ARTS – GRADE 12
 SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT 25% EXAMINATION 75%
 150 Marks + 100 Marks + 100 Marks = 350 converted to 100 Marks (SBA)
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 150 MARKS 100 MARKS 100 MARKS 200 MARKS
 TASK 1 TASK 3 TASK 4 TASK 6
 THEORY TEST CONCEPTUALISATION TRIAL EXAMINATION END OF YEAR EXAM
 (summative assessment) Topic 1 (summative assessment) P1 THEORY EXAM
 50 Marks (formative assessment) 100 Marks (summative assessment)
 100 Marks 100 Marks
 TASK 2 TASK 6 TASK 6
 CONCEPTUALISATION END OF YEAR EXAM END OF YEAR EXAM
 Topic 1 P2 CONCEPTUALISATION P2 ARTWORK
 (formative assessment) (summative assessment) (summative assessment)
 100 Marks (50 Marks) (50 Marks)
 TASK 5
 PRACTICAL ASSESSMENT TASK (PAT)
 (Continuous assessment from Term 1 – Term 2)
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4

 ARTWORK 1 ARTWORK 2 PAT: EXHIBITION
 Topic 2 Topic 2 (summative assessment)
 (formative assessment) 1 (formative assessment) 100 MARKS
 00 Marks 100 Marks
 25% 25% 50%

 Internally Assessed Artwork (Terms 1 + 2) = 50 Marks PROCESS & EXHIBITION = 50 Marks
 100%
 100 Marks (SBA) + 100 Marks (PAT) + 100 Marks (PRAC EXAM) + 100 Marks (Theory EXAM) = 400 TOTAL Marks

 133
 NOTE:
• The Practical Final Examination will run until the date written on examination brief.
• The PAT exhibition will be conducted according to Provincial blocked times as per its demographics.

4.3.2 Types of formal assessment for Visual Arts
Practical tasks – TOPIC 1 and Topic 2

(Refer to Addendum A and B in CAPS document)
All Practical Projects must consist of:
Topic 1: Sourcebook and Topic 2: Artwork

General Guidelines:
• In Grades 10-12 each learner must do one practical in Term 1 and Term 2.
• In Grade 12 tasks should be OPEN ENDED briefs that allow learners to choose the materials, tools, techniques,
 themes and processes within their specialised practical options, for example painting, sculpture, printmaking,
 et cetera.
• It is strongly advised that teachers set their own PATs, to inspire creativity and originality.
• Contextual factors should be taken into account, namely the materials, equipment and facilities at a school;
 resources, cost, experience of learners, et cetera.
• Appropriate media, techniques and/or approaches for the task.
• The exact aim or end product expected of the task regarding medium, size et cetera, must be remembered,
 to give scope to innovative and personal interpretations.
• When themes are decided on, always take the learners’ interests, experiences and context in account to
 challenge them. Artworks tell us about artist’s experiences, ideas and feelings. Encourage ‘honesty’ so that
 learners’ artworks speak of their experiences, ideas and feelings, so that they do not produce ‘second hand’
 works.
• Teachers should consider on a broad theme for the annual practical work and then subdivide it into specific
 aspects of the theme, in other words one per term. This can result in a more coherent body of work in the
 retrospective exhibition.
• Inspiring creativity, originality and innovation is of utmost importance.
• Set expectations, minimum requirements and deadlines regarding the end product.
• The written brief must give the exact aim or end product expected regarding medium, size, etc. remembering
 to give scope to innovative and personal interpretations.
• Although learners must receive a written brief, it is sometimes a good idea to give the brief to them just
 before starting with the final artwork. Topic 1 would consist of a series of ‘building blocks’ (Step-by-step
 activities as part of the process work) given at consecutive times to ensure experimentation. Learners may
 not know where the topic is leading them to, which creates an aspect of surprise. This prevents the tendency
 of learners getting stuck on their first idea without experimenting and researching other possibilities.
• The practical task for a term need not be only one final work, but can be a series of related works.
• The brief should include mini-deadlines to ensure pacing of the task. Minimum requirements and deadlines
 regarding the end sourcebook requirements and artwork must be clearly set.
• The teacher should ensure that at least 60% of each Practical task is done in class under supervision, as the
 teacher must authenticate the work as the learner’s own. If the teacher cannot authenticate the work, it
 should NOT be marked.

 134
 A practical task should require the learner to….
• do planning/research/experimentation to conceptualized their artwork
• perform the task according to criteria given
• produce an artwork
• allow for some innovation and creativity

The Practical task must …
• determine the content/skills/knowledge to be addressed;
• set clear criteria and give good instructions to guide the learner (the learner should know exactly what to do
 and what is expected);
• keep the scope manageable;
• include specific guidelines;
• determine which resources will be required to complete the project. Ensure that learners will have access to
 these resources;
• determine the time frame/duration/due date; and
• determine mark distribution and compile an assessment tool.

Guidelines on the sourcebook
• The sourcebook must provide insight into how the learner formed ideas, how many alternatives were
 investigated and other processes leading to the final work. The sourcebook should clearly communicate all
 thought processes leading to the making of artworks.
• The sourcebook should visually tell the ‘story’ of how the artwork was conceived, developed and produced
 through drawing, experimentation and writing. It should reflect the individuality and creativity of the visual
 arts learner.
• Any digital work e.g. photography, animation, etc. must be documented through screenshots, drawings
 and/or notes.
• If the learner work in a more process-like approach, the process must be documented e.g. drawings, notes
 and/or photo’s.
• There should be some evidence of reflection. It does not have to be an essay at the end of the process, but
 can be through notes and annotations throughout the sourcebook

The following must be covered in the sourcebook:
• Brief must be pasted in the Sourcebook.
• Concept development:
 o This could include mind maps, annotated sketches and drawings to show concept development.
 o Stress the importance of personalised research.
• Research, investigation, experimentation, et cetera: This should include some or all of the following:
 o Sketches, drawings, photos, images, collected poems, lyrics and any other material that was used as
 inspiration
 o Research on artists that have inspired the learner
 o Experimentation of media and/or different techniques.
 o Annotated drawings

 135
 • Process drawings
 o At least 30% of the should be drawings to explain concept development.
 o Drawing can range from simple line sketches to explain ideas to full tonal drawings. It could also include
 small paintings. It is important to express ideas and concepts through drawing e.g. annotated drawings.
• Presentation and overall view
 o The sourcebook should be visually interesting showing a personalised approach.
 o The sourcebook should consist of an average of 8-10 pages.

Note: The most important function of the sourcebook is to give insight in your thought processes leading to the
final artwork. There MUST be a clear link between the sourcebook and artwork.

TASK 7: PRACTICAL EXAMINATION – TOPIC 1 & 2

• The practical examination is set by National Education Department.
• NOTE: The maximum duration for the entire practical exam process will be stated on the National Practical
 Paper 2.
• The theme will be a wide and open-ended theme to cater for diverse solution in the different specialisation
 disciplines.
• Specialised options include drawing, painting, sculpture, printmaking, multi-media work, photography,
 ceramic sculpture, installations, new media work, photography, et cetera.
• As Topic 1(Conceptualising) has the same weighting as Topic 2 (The artwork), it should be given enough time
 to acknowledge its importance.
• The teacher may be involved in this preliminary preparatory session. Due to the preparatory nature of Topic
 1, learners are allowed to also work at home.
• All Topic 1 work may be completed and ready before the commencement of the Topic 2 examination work.
 Learners may use the Topic 1 sourcebook as a point of reference during their Topic 2 examination. Both
 Topic 1 and Topic 2 examination work must be submitted to the examination officer/teacher immediately
 after the Topic 2 examination is completed.
• The teacher is NOT to assist the candidate IN ANY WAY during the final production of the artwork (Topic 2).
• Topic 2 must be done on a continuous basis during contact time, for example during four consecutive days
 of six hours each. The choice of examination time division or options must be negotiated within each school.
• Topic 2 must be done at the learner’s examination centre or registered art centre, under the supervision.
 Topic 2 work may NOT leave the examination venue.

GUIDELINES
TOPIC 1: Sourcebook/Workbook
• This must be completed at school and at home during term 3.
• The teacher must introduce the question paper
• The teacher can guide the learners in their choice of subject matter, media and techniques used in Topic 2
 regarding the specific context of the school.
• The teacher must encourage the learners to explore as many different interpretations as possible. Closely
 monitor and guide the learners as they research the theme.
• The source book provides insight into the way that the learners have formed ideas, how many alternatives
 they have investigated and other processes leading to the final work. The source book should clearly
 communicate all thought processes leading to the making of artworks.

 136
 • There are no restrictions on size and it can be presented in any form.
• It is important to ban direct copying from magazines, the Internet et cetera. Direct copying of an image that
 is not the learner’s own will be penalised. This is a form of plagiarism and is unacceptable.
• Utmost importance is placed on the process of transformation of the source material. Learners can, however,
 use appropriate images from magazines and other sources and combine them with other images to create
 their own interpretations.
• There should be a clear link between the final artwork and the visual/written information in the sourcebook.
• Emphasis should be placed on preparatory sketches, drawings, experimentation of technique and materials
 that will be used in the final work.
• In the sourcebook the learner should VISUALLY tell the ‘story’ of how the artwork was CONCEIVED,
 DEVELOPED AND PRODUCED. This should be done through drawing, writing, experimenting, pasting, et
 cetera.
• The sourcebook should reflect individuality and creativity.

TOPIC 2: Artwork
• The examination work must be done in the presence of the Visual Arts teacher within the confines of the Art
 room.
• All materials needed for the examination must be brought into the examination venue, but NO examination
 work may be taken out of the classroom. This is regarded as an examination irregularity
• Learners may discuss the question paper with their Visual Arts teacher prior to the start of the examination,
 but no discussion of work may occur during the examination period.
• The learners are required to produce ONE art work in the practical discipline that they have chosen for the
 year,
• Their final artwork may be presented as a single piece, or possibly in the form of a diptych, triptych or a series
 of works that read as one work.
• The learners are not restricted on size, but the artwork must be manageable and durable in terms of transport to
 the examination centre, if required by the province.
• Allow for a variety of media, techniques, disciplines and approaches
• The learners must demonstrate an advanced degree of technical skill in the use of a range of materials and
 techniques chosen.
• There are no specific prescriptions regarding the style of the work. The learner can either work in the form
 of naturalism, expressionism, decorative et cetera.
• Learners may also incorporate other media to create mixed media work in any of the practical disciplines.
• Artworks that leave the school the art room/school i.e. foundry work, firing of sculptures, digital printing of
 photographs et cetera must be closely monitored by the art educator and signed out and signed in when the
 artwork is returned to the art room.
• Remember the importance of the art elements and principles of art such as line, shape, colour, texture, space,
 rhythm, balance, proportion and composition.
• Creativity and individuality must be emphasised. The artwork should be an expression of the candidate’s
 interests/ideas and concerns at the level of an 18/19-year-old.
• A successful artwork is a combination of concept and realisation. Beware of illustrative work. Emphasis should
 be placed on the aesthetic qualities, ‘freshness’ and energy of the artwork.
• In all digital/multimedia/new media work, concept development and realisation must play an important role.
 When marking, evidence of the candidate’s thought processes leading to the final realisation of the concept
 should be visually evident.

 137
 ASSESSMENT FOR PRACTICAL TASKS AND PRACTICAL EXAMINATIONS

TOPIC 1: THE SOURCEBOOK Assessment rubric

 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA This includes the following: Weighting
 Concept development • Mind maps, annotated sketches and drawings to show 25%
 concept development
 Research, investigation, This should include some or all of the following: 25%
 experimentation, et cetera • Sketches, drawings, photos, images, collected poems, lyrics
 and any other material that inspires you
 • Research on artists that have inspired you.
 • Experimentation of media and/or different techniques
 • All material must relate to the development of your work,
 substantiating your decisions
 Process drawings • At least 30% should be drawings to explain your concept 25%
 development
 Presentation and overall view • Visually interesting showing a personalised approach 25%
 • Your sourcebook should consist of an average of 8-10 pages
 Total for Practical Tasks 2 & 3 100
 Total for Practical Examination: Task 6 50

Guideline to assessment
• As can be seen from the rubric for the Sourcebook, the four assessment criteria carry equal weighting.
• Each assessment criteria must be marked as a percentage and then reworked to the total (Tasks 2 and 4 =
 100/ Task 6.1 = 50)
• The descriptive rubric, Assessment Criteria for Practical Work, MUST be use in all the criteria to ensure
 standardisation.
• Only the specific criteria must be marked. Teachers may not make their own requirements, although more
 specific guidelines can be given in Grade 10 and 11 to ensure development.
TOPIC 2 The Artwork
 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA This includes the following:

 Suitability of material and technique according to the concept Safe and
 Choice and use of materials/ techniques manageable
 Technical skill
 Use of formal art elements The importance of the elements and principles of art such as line, shape, colour, texture,
 space, rhythm, balance, harmony, proportion and composition
 Overall impression of work, originality, Generation of new, unique and novel responses/solutions
 creativity, innovation.
 Interpretation and practical A personal interpretation of a theme Experimenting.
 implementation of research. Trying new challenges

 Completion and presentation of  Attention to detail
 artwork.  Task completed in allocated time
  Presentation according to task
 Total for Practical Tasks 2 & 3 100

 Total for Practical Examination: Task 6 50

 138
 Guideline to assessment
• The artwork MUST be assessed holistically and no specific mark allocations may be used for the different
 criteria.
• The descriptive rubric, Assessment Criteria for Practical Work, MUST be use to ensure standardisation.

PAT Exhibition – TOPIC 2

• Topic 2: making of Artworks. According to CAPs, Grade 12 learners must display, exhibit or present own work in
 a manner which enhances and complements the expressive and conceptual impact of the work.
• At the end of year all grades learners must present a PAT exhibition of their work as part of their examination
 mark.
• This exhibition shows substantial evidence of the learners’ Visual Arts conceptualisation, technical skills and
 knowledge developed over the period of the grade. It showcases the learners’ practical development in
 presenting a cohesive body of work similar to a small one-man exhibition.
• The artworks (Topic 2) from the two Practical tasks are compulsory and minimum requirements.
• As the nature of the subject is creativity and self-expression, learners may not be boxed in by the minimum
 requirements, but allowed to do more works relating to the two themes they have investigated. We need
 to encourage self-expression and individuality of learners in this exhibition.
• Grade 12 learners should use the opportunity to further develop and extend their practical work into a
 cohesive and holistic body of work that is seen in the context of an exhibition environment. Therefore,
 learners may exhibit more works that provides evidence of this process e.g. work done on their own and/or
 extend their theme/s into more artworks.
• The sourcebook/s, although already assessed, must be displayed to demonstrate the development to the
 final Artwork/s.
• This body of work will be assessed holistically:
Checklist for the exhibition:
• Grade 12: The artworks (Topic 2) from the two Practical tasks are compulsory.
• Learners have the opportunity to further develop and extend their practical work into a cohesive and holistic
 body of work that is seen in the context of an exhibition environment. Therefore, learners may exhibit more
 works that provides evidence of this process e.g. work done on their own.
• The sourcebook/s, although already assessed, must be displayed.

Presentation:
• Teachers should provide the space for the exhibition e.g. the school hall, art classroom, etc.
• Teachers should make learners aware of the importance of presenting their work and provide guidelines for
 a neat, professional exhibition.
• Learners must curate their own exhibition.
• Framing of works is unnecessary, but in many cases simple mounting will enhance the work.
• Learners must be refrained from using props, accessories etc. The exhibition must show an awareness of
 professional exhibition practices.
• If computers are necessary to show digital work, learners must make sure that they work and that they know
 passwords.

 139
 Assessment
The following is a guideline of aspects that will result in the final valid mark:
• Overall progress and development of the learner to independent and individual solutions
• Creativity and originality
• Technical skills
• Personal involvement and expression in the process and final works
• Substantiation in the sourcebook: conceptualisation, exploration and experimentation of media, techniques,
 styles, etc. Sufficient exploration of drawing.
• Full marks cannot be awarded if all required artworks are not presented. Marks should be adjusted according
 to the presented works.
• The descriptive rubric, Assessment Criteria for Practical Work, MUST be use to ensure standardisation.

ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
This body of work will be assessed holistically:

 CRITERIA

 Overall impression of work – originality, creativity, innovation: Development of new and unique responses / solutions

 Choice and use of materials/techniques: Suitability of materials and techniques according to the concept. Safety and
 manageability. Technical skills shown.

 Use of formal art elements: The importance of elements and principles of art such as line, shape, colour, texture, space,
 rhythm, balance, harmony, proportion and composition

 Interpretation and practical implementation of theme/s: A personal interpretation of a theme. Experimentation. Tackle
 new challenges

 Completion and presentation of artwork: Attention to detail.
 Task completed in time allowed. Presentation according to task

 Curating of exhibition: professionalism, clear, etc.

 TOTAL: 100

 140
 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA FOR PRACTICAL WORK
This descriptive rubric must be used in all practical assessments (Sourcebooks, Artworks and PAT exhibition) to
ensure standardisation
 Outstanding 90 – 100 • The learner generated many ideas; tried unusual combinations or changes before
 choosing one idea; made connections to previous knowledge; mastery of problem solving
 skills.
 • Effort far beyond that required.
 • The 'WOW' factor is evident.
 • Works show great innovation.
 • Content/conceptual richness of the work is excellent.
 • The work as a whole is confident and evocative: it engages the viewer with excellent
 visual qualities.
 • The work clearly demonstrates original vision, a variety of innovative ideas and/or risk
 taking, and inventive articulation of a broad range of the elements and principles.
 • Outstanding and original presentation. Exceptional ability, creativity richness, insightful,
 fluent, high skill, observation and knowledge powerfully expressed; supported by an
 original or unusual selection of relevant visual references.
 Excellent 80 – 89 • Striking impact: most of the above; detailed: well organised and coherent; polished; skill
 evident; supported by an original /unusual/relevant visual references; presentation
 original and considered; less resolved; some minor flaws evident.
 • Often excellent technical abilities, but not as innovative OR very innovative, but lacking
 technical richness.
 Very Good 70 – 79 • Well organised, as above, but lacks the 'glow and sparkle’ (less convincing in terms of
 imagination, creativity and innovation); good level of competence and selection of
 content; supported by a good selection of relevant visual references; obvious care and
 effort taken with original presentation; some obvious inconsistencies/flaws evident.
 • Good evidence of effort and commitment. Interesting/innovative/creative, but not
 technically resolved.
 • Technically good, but lacks conceptual richness or vice versa. Work may be creatively
 innovated, but lacks technical skill.
 Good 60 – 69 • The work demonstrates some originality; clear intent; convincing; simple direct use of
 medium; displays understanding but tends towards the pedestrian and stereotyped
 response at times; adequate selection of relevant visual references; reasonable effort
 taken with presentation; distracting/obvious inconsistencies.
 • Sound level of competence.
 Average 50 – 59 • Adequate; feels mechanical; derivative or copied; little insight.
 • Unimaginative; some visual references not always clearly identified.
 • Fair presentation; many distracting inconsistencies.
 • Average level of technical competence. Possibly limited commitment in terms of time
 and effort.
 • Imagery is copied from another source with little transformation of images.
 • Little evidence of trying anything unusual.
 • Scope of work is narrow and or repetitive.
 Below Average 40 – 49 • Enough material/works to pass; not logically constructed.
 • Limited selection of information; poor technical skills and/or a lack of time on task might
 be contributing factors.
 • Little use of visual information, clumsy or careless presentation in need of support/
 motivation to pass.
 • Imagery is copied from another source with very little transformation.
 • Composition is weak and undeveloped; no evidence of planning, or incomplete
 planning.
 Weak 30 – 39 • Just enough material/works to pass.

 141
 • Visually uninteresting, uncreative; limited/poor technical skill used.
 • Little attempt to present information in an acceptable manner, little or no visual
 information/reference.
 • General lack of commitment; in need of support/motivation to pass.
 • Insufficient time on task. Standard below the acceptable.
 • Poor solutions to problems; artwork is copied and superficial. No evidence of original
 thought.
 Very Weak Fail 20 – 29 • Very little information; jumbled; not easy to view; little or irrelevant work/ visual
 information.
 • No effort made to present work in an acceptable manner; general lack of commitment/
 cooperation.
 • Very poor skills level.
 • Project very weak or incomplete.
 • Poor artistic decision-making.
 • Classes were missed and learner failed to make up the time.
 Unacceptable 0 – 19 • Incoherent; irrelevant; very little or no work; lack of even limited skills; no commitment/
 Fail cooperation.
 • Work incomplete.
 • Poor artistic decision-making/learner put forth no effort.
 • Most classes were missed and student failed to make up the time.
 • Incoherent: irrelevant, very little or no work: lack of even limited skills being applied.
 No commitment/cooperation.

TEST – Topic 3
• A test for formal assessment should not comprise of a series of small tests, but should cover a substantial
 amount of content and the duration should be 45 to 60 minutes.
• Learners are tested on understanding and application of learning material. Learners are required to write
 longer reflective answers, such as paragraph-type responses to a given scenario. Paragraphs providing
 reasons and supporting evidence or arguments are essential.
• Each test must cater for a range of cognitive levels and must also include paragraph-type responses.
• Questions should include unseen visual images to test learners’ visual literacy skills. These images should
 relate to the learners’ theme of study, e.g. thematically or stylistic, as well as works/movements that they
 have studied.

Examinations – Topic 3
Internally set examinations
• It is recommended that the same format as in the final Grade 12 end-of-year theory examination is used in
 internally set examinations.
• Question papers must include unseen visual images to test learners’ visual literacy skills. These images
 should relate to the learners’ theme of study, e.g. thematically or stylistic, as well as works/ movements
 that they have studied.
• Ensure that enough or more facts are included in each question on the memorandum in order to become a
 proper tool for marking and future teaching.

 142
 External Examination
All Grade 12 Visual arts candidates will complete two external papers as prescribed:

 Paper Type of paper Duration Total Date Marking
 1 Theory 3 hours 100 October/November Externally
 2 Practical Maximum 24 hours 100 July - October Externally

• The written theory examination is set by DBE on designated content taught during the year. Only Grade 12
 content will be assessed. However, prior knowledge from Grade 10 and 11 may be necessary to interpreted
 and answer some of the questions.
• The time allocation for this paper is 3 hours.
• The examination format will consist of 8 questions; the learner will select five [5] that they have studied in
• Each question will be 20 marks with a total of 100 for the paper.
• Questions appear on left-hand pages, with visual sources in colour on the right-hand pages.
• All questions are to be answered in essay style, using full sentences and paragraphs according to the
 instructions for each question. Lists of facts will be severely penalised.
• Questions will consist of short and longer essay type questions.
• Questions would consist of visual literacy and content that has been studied.
• The examination is externally assessed and moderated provincially and nationally.
• The examination is assessed according to a National Marking Memorandum.

Assessing learner’s ability to analyse and respond to examples of visual culture

 ACHIEVEMENT LEARNING OUTCOME 4: VISUAL CULTURE STUDIES �
 RATING CODE

 7 Demonstrates exceptional ability to respond to and analyse artworks in relation to their
 Outstanding cultural, social, political and historical contexts.
 80-100% Shows outstanding ability in the use of appropriate visual arts terminology.
 Demonstrates extremely well-developed writing and research skills in the study of art.
 Shows exceptional insight; understanding and uses divergent approaches.

 6 Demonstrates a well-developed ability to respond and analyse artworks in relation to their
 Meritorious cultural, social, political and historical contexts.
 70-79% Shows excellent ability in the use of appropriate visual arts terminology.
 Demonstrates highly developed writing and research skills in the study of art.
 Shows excellent insight and understanding.

 5 Demonstrates substantial ability to respond to and analyse artworks in relation to their
 Substantial cultural, social, political and historical contexts.
 60-69% Shows substantial competence in the use of appropriate visual arts terminology.
 Demonstrates well-developed writing and research skills in the study of art.
 Shows a good level of insight and understanding.

 4 Demonstrates moderate ability to respond to and analyse art works in relation to their cultural,
 Moderate social, political and historical contexts.
 50-59% Shows moderate competence in the use of appropriate visual arts terminology.
 Demonstrates competent writing and research skills in the study of art Shows a
 fair level of insight and understanding.

 3 Demonstrates adequate ability to respond to and analyse artworks in relation to their cultural,
 Adequate social, political and historical contexts.
 40-49% Shows adequate competence in the use of appropriate visual arts terminology.
 Demonstrates adequate writing and research skills in the study of art.

 154

 143
 2 Demonstrates only basic ability to respond to and analyse art works in relation to their cultural,
 Elementary social, political and historical contexts.
 30-39% Shows little ability in the use of appropriate visual arts terminology.
 Demonstrates basic writing and research skills in the study of art

 1 Demonstrates little or no ability to respond to and analyse artworks in relation to their cultural,
 Not achieved social, political and historical contexts.
 0-29% Shows extremely limited ability in the use of appropriate visual arts terminology.
 Demonstrates limited writing and research skills in the study of art.
 Shows little or no understanding or insight.

Cognitive Levels
• All tests and examinations must follow the following range of cognitive levels. Questions will have
 different degrees of challenges – easy, medium and hard.
• As learners have a choice of questions in the trial and final examinations, each question should comply
 with the range of cognitive levels.
• Teachers must complete an analysis grid of cognitive levels for all tests and examinations they set to comply
 with the following cognitive levels.

 Cognitive Level Percentage
 Lower order: knowledge 30
 Middle order: comprehension and application 40
 Higher order: analysis, evaluation and synthesis 30

Explanation of cognitive levels: Bloom’s Taxonomy

 KNOWLEDGE COMPREHENSION APPLICATION

 tell, list, write, find, describe, name, explain, interpret, discuss, solve, show, use, illustrate, classify,
 locate, et cetera. distinguish, outline, et cetera. construct, examine, et cetera.

 ANALYSIS SYNTHESIS EVALUATION

 Analyse, compare, investigate, create, invent, plan, predict, design, judge, decide, justify, debate,
 categorise, identify, explain, et cetera. propose, formulate, et cetera. recommend, prioritise, argue, et cetera.

Bloom’s Revised Taxonomy

 Bloom’s Taxonomy Bloom’s Revised Taxonomy

 Evaluation – higher order Creating – higher order

 Synthesis – higher order Evaluating – higher order

 Analysis – middle order Analysing – middle order

 Application – middle order Applying – middle order

 Comprehension – middle order Understanding – middle order

 Knowledge – lower order Remembering – lower order

 144
 The mark allocation for Grade 12 November theory examination paper is indicated below:

 Grade 12
 Learners can answer any 5 questions

 Question 1 The voice of emerging artists 20

 Question 2 South African artists influenced by African and/or indigenous art forms 20

 Question 3 Socio-political art - including Resistance Art of the ‘70s and ‘80s 20

 Question 4 Art, craft and spiritual works mainly from rural South Africa 20

 Question 5 Multimedia and new media - alternative contemporary and popular art forms in South Africa 20

 Question 6 Post-democratic identity in South Africa 20

 Question 7 Gender issues: masculinity and femininity 20

 Question 8 Architecture in South Africa 20

4.4 Recording and reporting
• Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific
 assessment task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in
 the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence
 of the learner’s conceptual progression within a grade and his/her readiness to progress or being promoted
 to the next grade. Records of learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by
 teachers and learners in the teaching and learning process.
• Reporting is the process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other
 stakeholders. Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’
 meetings, school visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters.
 Teachers in all grades issue formal report cards quarterly. These reports cards reflect the percentages against
 each subject. The following rating scale applies for the quarterly reports:

Codes and percentages for recording and reporting

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE
 7 Outstanding achievement
 6 Meritorious achievement
 5 Substantial achievement
 4 Adequate achievement
 3 Moderate achievement
 2 Elementary achievement
 1 Not achieved

Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages against the
subject on the learners’ report cards.

 145
 4.5 Moderation of assessment
4.5.1 Formal assessment (SBA)
 Grade 12 tasks must be face moderated by the provincial subject advisor or appointed specialist. This process
 will be managed by the provincial education department.

4.5.1 Practical assessment task (Pat)
  Marking must be done according to the DBE rubrics by a panel (peer teachers or external panel).
  All learners must be face moderated to verify the process, products and marks. This moderation must
 be done by Provincial officials and/or persons appointed by the province.
  The Provincial Education Department manages this process.

4.5.2 Final practical external examinations
  Marking must be done according to the DBE rubrics by a panel (peer teachers or external panel).
  All learners must be face moderated to verify the process, products and marks. This moderation must
 be done by Provincial officials and/or persons appointed by the province.
  The Provincial Education Department manages this process.

4.6 General
 This document should be read in conjunction with:
 4.6.1 National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R-12; and
 4.6.2 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12.

 146