1.1 ACCOUNTING

Page Content to be Correction
 No. corrected
30 Retired shares Add: Retired shares to definition and explanation of
 concepts.
 Treasury shares Insert a text box: Treasury shares are not dealt with in
 Grade 12 because we don’t deal with buying back of
 shares from subsidiaries and trusts.
30 Outstanding Add: Outstanding share capital under definition of
 share capital company concepts.
30 GAAP: Principle Add: Principle of consistency.
 of consistency
31 Contributed Add: Contributed capital and Retained Income under
 capital and the Transactions on the buyback of shares.
 Retained Income
33 Grade 12: The columns in the assessment rows in the summary of
 Assessment rows Annual Teaching Plan should be merged per term
 in the summary of
 Annual Teaching
 Plan

 Grade 11 Add: Explanatory note in the textbox.
 Assessments:
 Grade 10: Add: Explanatory note in the textbox.
 Assessments
 33 Governance Add: Application of King Code.
35 VAT Control Add: VAT Input and VAT Output accounts to give
 account learners the background knowledge.
37 2. Budgeting:  Remove “or companies” in the Cash budget and
 Analysis, projected income statement.
 interpretation and  To read thus:
 comparison of “Analysis, interpretation and comparison of cash
 projected income budget and projected income statement of a sole
 statements for trader”.
 sole traders or
 companies.
31 Receipts and Correct: “Receipts and solvent” to read “receipts and
 Insolvent estate insolvent estate”.
31 Year-end Change yearend adjustments to be “year-end”
 adjustments
37 Price fixing Incorrect spelling of price fixing appears as “price-
 fixing”.
37 2. Budgeting:  Change “statements” and write “statement”.
 Analysis,
 interpretation and  Change “budgets of sole traders” to “budget of a
 comparison of sole trader”.
 projected income
 statements and
 cash budgets for
 sole traders or
 companies.
 1.2 AFRIKAANS HOME LANGUAGE

Page Content to be corrected Correction
 No.
23 … dele van ŉ boek, Substitute a comma after byvoorbeeld with a
 byvoorbeeld, titelbladsy, colon
 >… dele van ŉ boek, byvoorbeeld:
 titelbladsy,
27 Under Drama: Add the following:
 Karakterisering (konflik) >
  Karakterisering (konflik)

27 Under Drama: Add the following:
 Dramatiese struktuur: intrige en (antiklimaks) >
 subintrige (eksposisie,  Dramatiese struktuur: intrige en
 motoriese moment, ontwikkeling subintrige (eksposisie, motoriese
 / verwikkeling, krisis, klimaks, moment, ontwikkeling / verwikkeling,
 ontknoping / afloop) krisis, klimaks, ontknoping / afloop
 (antiklimaks))
27 Under Drama: captured as Recapture as
 Stemming en toon  Toon en stemming

27 Under Drama: Add the following:
 Toneelaanwysings / subteks / neweteks >
  Toneelaanwysings / subteks / neweteks
27 Under Drama: Add the following:
 Tydsverloop (chronologies, terugflitse, tydspronge) >
  Tydsverloop (chronologies, terugflitse,
 tydspronge)
28 Under Roman / Kortverhale: Add the following:
 Intrige en subintrige / (sommige romans en kortverhale kan
 spanningslyn dieselfde struktuur van die drama volg) >
 Intrige en subintrige / spanningslyn
 (sommige romans en kortverhale kan
 dieselfde struktuur van die drama volg)
28 Under Roman / Kortverhale: Add the following:
 Rol van die verteller / perspektief >
  Rol van die verteller / perspektief
28 Under Roman / Kortverhale: Add the following:
 Stemming Toon >
  Toon en stemming
28 Under Roman / Kortverhale: Capture as:
 Stemming, ironiese wending /  Toon en stemming
 afloop  Ironiese wending / afloop
29 (formele letterkunde-onderrig) Add comma after bracket > (formele
 inligtingsdoeleindes letterkunde-onderrig), inligtingsdoeleindes

31 Skryf eerste poging en hou doel Substitute the word genre with tekssoort.>
 gehoor, onderwerp en genre in Skryf eerste poging en hou doel gehoor,
 gedagte. onderwerp en tekssoort in gedagte.
35 Transakionele Substitute the word Transakionele with
 Transaksionele.
 AFRIKAANS FIRST ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE

Page Content to be corrected Correction
 No.

27 Voorgestelde lengte van Include the following:
 mondelinge kommunikasie Onvoorbereide toesprake under Tekste in
 table (below Voorbereide toesprake) and 1-2
 minute opposite Onvoorbereide toesprake in
 the column
 Tydsduur
27 Voorgestelde lengte van tekste Substitute:
 wat vir luisterbegrip gebruik informatiewe tekste with inligtingstekste >
 moet word
 • Verwysings- en inligtingstekste
 • Verwysings- en informatiewe
 tekste

30 Sinsbou Write the word Sinsbou in lower case >
 sinsbou

32 Under Roman / Kortverhale: Add the following:
 … intrige, subintrige (sommige romans en kortverhale kan
 dieselfde struktuur van die drama volg) >
 … intrige, subintrige (sommige romans en
 kortverhale kan dieselfde struktuur van die
 drama volg)
34 (formele letterkunde-onderrig) Substitute:
 informatiewe doeleindes informatiewe doeleindes with
 inligtingsdoeleindes >
 (formele letterkunde-onderrig),
 inligtingsdoeleindes
 34 (formele letterkunde-onderrig) Add comma: after the bracket >
 inligtingsdoeleindes (formele letterkunde-onderrig),
 inligtingsdoeleindes
49 Verbind sinsdele en sinne aan Replace preposition aan with met >
 mekaar. Verbind sinsdele en sinne met mekaar.

51-52 3.5 ONDERRIGPLANNE Replace Literêre teks with Studie van die
 Geїntegreerde taalonderrig: Letterkunde >
 die onderrigsiklus 3.5 ONDERRIGPLANNE
 Literêre teks (1-18) Geїntegreerde taalonderrig: die
 onderrigsiklus
 Studie van die Letterkunde (1-18)
54-85 Onderrigplan – Lees en kyk: Replace Literêre teks with Studie van die
 Literêre teks Letterkunde under the Onderrigplan – Lees
 The Home Language refers to en kyk columns >
 Studie van die Letterkunde Studie van die Letterkunde
 while the First Additional
 Language refers to Literêre
 teks (1 – 18)
54 Graad 10: Onderrigplan Substitute:
 Weke 1 & 2 informatiewe paragraaf with
 Column: Skryf en aanbied inligtingsparagraaf >
 Skryf ŉ informatiewe paragraaf Graad 10: Onderrigplan
 Under column: Skryf en aanbied
 Skryf ŉ inligtingsparagraaf
60 Bedrywende en lydende vorm Change the word order Bedrywende en
 lydende vorm >
 Lydende en bedrywende vorm

64 Graad 11: Onderrigplan Substitute:
 Weke 1 & 2 informatiewe paragraaf with
 Column: Skryf en aanbied inligtingsparagraaf >
 Skryf ŉ informatiewe paragraaf Graad 11: Onderrigplan
 Under column: Skryf en aanbied
 Skryf ŉ inligtingsparagraaf
77 Graad 12: Onderrigplan Substitute:
 Weke 3 & 4 informatiewe paragraaf with inligtingsverslag
 Column: Skryf en aanbied >
 Skryf ŉ informatiewe verslag Graad 12: Onderrigplan
 Under column: Skryf en aanbied
 Skryf ŉ inligtingsverslag
80 Weke 11 en 12 Include the following:
 Taalstrukture en -konvensies Direkte en indirekte rede under the
 column ‘Taalstrukture en -konvensies’ column
 AFRIKAANS SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE

Page Content to be corrected Correction
 No.

25 Voorgestelde lengte van tekste Substitute:
 wat vir luisterbegrip gebruik informatiewe tekste with inligtingstekste >
 moet word
 • Verwysings- en inligtingstekste
 • Verwysings- en informatiewe
 tekste

31 (formele letterkunde-onderrig) Substitute informatiewe doeleindes with
 informatiewe doeleindes inligtingsdoeleindes >
 (formele letterkunde-onderrig),
 inligtingsdoeleindes

31 (formele letterkunde-onderrig) Add a comma after the bracket > (formele
 informatiewe doeleindes letterkunde-onderrig), inligtingsdoeleindes

42 3.5 ONDERRIGPLANNE Replace Literêre teks with Studie van die
 Geїntegreerde taalonderrig: Letterkunde >
 die onderrigsiklus 3.5 ONDERRIGPLANNE
 Literêre teks Geїntegreerde taalonderrig: die
 onderrigsiklus
 Studie van die Letterkunde
47-78 Onderrigplan – Lees en kyk: Replace Literêre teks with Studie van die
 Literêre teks: Letterkunde under the Onderrigplan –
 The Home Language refers to Lees en kyk columns >
 Studie van die Letterkunde Studie van die Letterkunde:
 while the Second Additional
 Language refers to Literêre
 teks
 1.3 AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES

Page No. Content to be corrected Correction
39 (Term 1 Week abomasums; and Abomasum/Simple stomach; and
1)
40 (Term 1 Week - water-soluble Vitamin B1; B2; B6 and B12
4) B1; B2; B6 and B12

41 (Term 1 Week  The differences The differences between small-scale
6) between small- and large-scale / subsistence and
 scale/subsistence and commercial farming systems
 large-
 scale/commercial
 farming systems
43 (Term 1 Week - epididymis Epididymis
8)
46 (Term 2 Week The importance and colostrum
1) functions of colostrums
 and hormones involved
46 (Term 2 Week … and coccidosis coccidiosis
2)
50 (Term 3 Week Management Management
3)
52 (Term 3 Week Controlled Marketing Move this to above Co-operative
6)  The concept: marketing (on same page above)
 controlled marketing
57 [Research A maximum of three A minimum of three weeks…
project / task weeks….
(grades 10 and
11)]
 61 Tests/Quarter-ending Quarter-ending tests/Mid-year
 tests examinations
61 (Test/Quarter- 2. The marks for the test 2. The marks for the test should be
ending tests) is not prescribed but at least 50 marks and mid-year
 should be determined by examination marks should at least be
 the teacher taking into 150 marks taking into account the
 account the volume of the volume of the content covered and
 content covered and the the time available
 time available
 1.4 BUSINESS STUDIES

Page Content to be corrected Correction
No.
32 Term 1 – Week 11 missing Insert Week 11 for revision and Term Test as it
 appears in the Annual Teaching Plan

39 Criteria for Add: Recap : Team development stages,
 successful team team dynamics and theories
 performance(recap)

39 Business sector and its Include; Clarification of the concepts: Business
 environment sector and Economic sector

41  Calculations (interest, Correction: start with:
 etc.)
  The difference between compound interest
  The difference between and simple interest
 compound interest and
  Calculations (interest, etc.)
 simple interest

41 Investment: Securities Move Johannesburg Securities Exchange from
 under Types and place as main heading above
 Types. It must have a main bullet.

41 Investment: Insurance Add:

 Compensation of Occupational Injuries and
 Diseases Act (COIDA)

41  (Recap the  (Recap the characteristics, advantages,
 characteristics, disadvantages and comparison of forms of
 advantages, ownership, i.e. Sole Trader, Partnership,
 disadvantages and Close corporation, Co-operatives, Profit
 comparison of forms of Companies and Non- Profit Companies –
 ownership, i.e. Sole focus on issues of capacity, taxation,
 Trader, Partnership, management, capital, division of profits and
 Close corporation, legislation)
 Private Company and
  Forms of ownership (i.e. Sole Trader,
 Public Company –
 Partnership, Close corporation, Co-
 focus on issues of
 operatives, Profit Companies and Non-
 capacity, taxation,
 Profit Companies ), and their impact on
 management, capital,
 the success or failure of a business
 division of profits and
 legislation)

  Forms of ownership
 (e.g. Sole Trader,
 Company), and their
 impact on the success
 of a business

47 List of forms of Add: Assignment
 assessment: (Short notes on assignment required)

 Assignment and Oral
 Change Oral presentation to Presentation
 Presentation

47 Presentation Presentation

  Presentations can be  Presentations of business information must
 written or oral, but there be in writing or oral and oral presentation
 must be evidence of the must also be accompanies by written
 presentation. evidence.

48 Tests should cover a range Tests should cover a range of integrated
 of integrated topics, as topics, as determined by the Annual Teaching
 determined by the Work Plan and assessment plan
 schedule and assessment
 plan
51 4.7 Annexures Section B:
 BUSINESS STUDIES Question 2 – Business Environments,
 GRADE 10-12 Question 3 – Business Ventures
 EXAMINATION PAPER Question 4 – Business Roles
 GUIDELINE Question 5 – Business Operations
 Question 6 – Miscellaneous (25 % from each
 main topic – 15 marks each out of 60)
All the Indentation and Change to –
pages of alignment of topics 2. Human rights, inclusivity
the and numbers in and environmental issues.
Annual the topic column (An hyphen or dash in some words is
Teaching e.g. 2. Human not needed)
Plan rights, inclusivity
 and environ-
 mental issues.

33 Consumer Protection Act Consumer Protection Act No. 68 of 28 April
 No. 68 of 28 April 2009 2008
33 Indented Bullets for ------- Main Bullets for Human Rights, Inclusivity and
 Human Rights, ----------- Environmental
 Inclusivity - ----------------
 Environmental issues
35 Ethics and Professionalism and ethics
 Professionalism
36  Types of business  Types of business Strategies
 Strategies
 - Integration Strategies
 - Integration
 Strategies o Forward integration, backward
 integration, horizontal integration
- Forward
 intergration, - Intensive strategies
 backward
 o Market penetration, market
 intergration,
 development and product
 horizontal
 development’
 intergration
 - Diversification strategies
- Intensive
 strategies o Concentric diversification, horizontal
 diversification and conglomerate
- Market
 diversification
 penetration,
 market - Defensive Strategies
 development and
 o Retrenchment, divestiture and
 product
 liquidation.
 development’

- Diversification
 strategies

- Concentric
 diversification,
 horizontal
 diversification and
 conglomerate
 diversification

- Defensive
 Strategies

- Retrenchment,
 divestiture and
 liquidation.

39 2. Human rights, 2. Human rights, inclusivity and
 inclusivity and environmental issues
 environ-mental
 issues
 5. Management and leadership
 5. Manage-ment
 and leadership

39 Team Team performance assessment, Conflict
 performance management and Problem solving
 assessment
 Conflict
 management and
 problem solving

47 Project……..e.g. Project……..e.g. the first term for
 the first term for submission during the Third term
 submission during
 the next (second)
 term
 1.5 COMPUTER APPLICATIONS TECHNOLOGY

Page No. Content to be Correction
 corrected
P 50 See below See table below
(Eng)
P 56 (Afr.)

Add the part highlighted in yellow to the table
Lower Order Middle Order Higher Order
(Knowledge/Remembering) (Understanding/Applying) (Analyzing/evaluating/creating)
(Routine procedures) (Multi-step procedures) (Problem Solving)
(Information gathering) (Information (Productive thinking/Applying
 processing/Building understanding)
 understanding)
30% 40% 30%

Afrikaans:
Laer Orde Middelorde Hoërorde
(Kennis/Onthou) (Begrip/Toepassing) (Ontleding/evaluering/skep)
(Roetine prosedures) (Multistapprosedures) (Probleemoplossing)
(Inligtingsversameling) (Inligtingsverwerking/Bou (Produktiewe
 begrip) denke/Begripstoepassing)
30% 40% 30%
 AFRIKAANS CAPS (REKENAAR TOEPASSING STEGNOLOGIE)

Page 41 under Oplossingsontwikkeling: HTML/Webontwerp
Skakel-sintaks (link syntax): <‘n href=“http://www.google.com”>This is ‘n link
</’n>
Replace ‘n with a

CAPS p 26 Solution Development: Spreadsheets: Replace mean with median
CAPS p 52: Paragraph starting with ‘The learner will not be required...’ delete last
part of sentence (it is unnecessary): “or imported from documents such as a text
file, word processing document, database table or a spreadsheet.”
 1.6 CONSUMER STUDIES

Page Content to be corrected Correction
No.

33 Implementation plan for the Implementation plan for the production and
 production and marketing of marketing of homemade product/s
 a homemade product ( (product/s depends on practical option)
 product depends on
 practical option)
 1.6 CONSUMER STUDIES
Page No. Content to be corrected Correction

8 A school chooses ONE of A learner chooses one of the following for small scale production
 the following small –
 scale production

32 Clothing Clothing and design elements and principles

32 Creating a cash flow Interpreting a cash flow projection
 projection(optional)

29 The Consumer Protection The Consumer Protection Act of 2009 (basic knowledge of the purpose of the act
 Act of 2009 and how it protects consumers)

29 South African Bureau of South African Bureau of Standards (basic knowledge of the organisation and how it
 Standards protects consumers)

63 Omission guidance on Include omission guidance table* on structure of the midyear examinations
 structure of the midyear attached below
 examinations
 1.10 ECONOMICS

Page Content to be corrected Correction
No.
14-23 Classification of topics in Insert a column for main topic
(Gr.10) the ATP under main
25-31 topics
(Gr.11)
33-38 Public sector should be moved to
(Gr.12) Macroeconomics
  Public sector
 incorrectly
 classified under
 Microeconomics
 (p.8)
Grade Sequencing: Public sector should be placed above dynamics
10 In Grade 10 the public of markets (p.8) and in summary of the ATP
11&12 sector is not well placed (p.13) and the ATP (p.16) it should be handled
 in terms of sequencing. in week1 and 2 of term 2.

 Price elasticity should be moved to term 2 week
 5-6.
 Dynamics of markets to be moved to week 1-2
 of term 2.

Grade Sequencing of the topics The sequencing of the topics on p.27 for Grade
11 in the Overview, 11 must correspond with Overview of topics
P.11 Summary of ATP and (p.11) and Summary of Grade 11 ATP term 2
 ATP does not (p.24)
 correspond.(term 2)
Gr. 12  Incorrect topic p.33- International Trade
P33 & (Foreign exchange
32 market)
  P32. Economic
 Growth and
 Development
  Term 2: Economic Term2: International trade policies
 systems Summary
 of ATP
32-37 Discrepancy between the Align the Summary with the ATP e.g. Term 1
 Summary of the ATP and
 ATP Grades 10-12  Replace “economic problem” with
 causes confusion: “economic issues of the day”
  Term 3 Week 4
 Summary of ATP  Classify Tourism in both summary of
 (p.32) talks ATP and ATP under “ economic
 Economic problem issues of the day”
 while ATP (36)
 talks of economic
 issues of the day.

  Term 3 Week 5:
 Tourism should be
 correctly classified.

P. 36 Term 3 week 3 & 4 in Include the specific topics to be addresses:
 Summary of ATP: week 3- social and economic performance
 Specific content has not indicators
 been indicated Week 4- inflation

  Classify it under “Economic Issues of the day”
 in both S of ATP and ATP

  Term 3 Week 6:
 Environmental
 Sustainability
 should be correctly
 classified.
P. 33 Guidance in terms of the
 depth for some of the
 topics e.g.
  Multiplier  Explanation of the multiplier with the aid
 of a graph

  Include the types of foreign exchange
 systems.

  The establishment
 of foreign exchange
 rates
P.36  What are the most Aims, characteristics, successes and the
 relevant aspects to be challenges of the policies, etc.
 looked into when (Put the above content clarification in italics in
 dealing with growth term 3, week 1 topic 2)
 and development
 policies?
30 SACC SACU
 45 Question paper structure: Question 2.2 mark allocation should be
 Section B-Question 2.2 2x10=20( it should be two questions each
 allocation of marks: weighing 10 marks)
 10x2=20
 1.11 ENGINEERING GRAPHICS AND DESIGN

Page No. Content to be corrected Correction

30, 33, 35, 36, Third term test as a Should be removed as a formal
38, 44 formal assessment assessment requirement
 requirement.

 NOTE: Clarity on this will be found in
 NOTE: Clarity on this the 6 rows below.
 will be found in the 6
 rows below.

30 Table 1: Table 1:
  “Test” – 15%
  Remove “Test”
  “Course drawings” -
  Increase “Course drawings”
 15%
 contribution to 25%.

 Table 3:
 Table 3:
  “ALL tests” – 15 marks (3.75%)
  “ALL tests” – 30
  “Mid-year and prep. Exam.” – 55 marks
 marks (7.5%)
 (13.75%)
  “Mid-year and prep.
 Exam.” – 40 marks
 (10%)
33 GRADE 12: GRADE 12:
  Two tests  One test
35 Table 1 (under Table 1 (under “LEARNER’S EGD FILE”):
 “LEARNER’S EGD  Tests: - 15
 FILE”):  Examinations: - 55
  Tests: - 30
  Examinations: - 40
 36 Table 2: (Row 3 - Table 2: (Row 3 - “Tests”):
 “Tests”): (Column 4 – “TERM 3”)
 (Column 4 – “TERM 3”)  Remove the “1”
  “1” indicated
38 Table: TERM 3 Table: TERM 3
  “Course drawings” –  “Course drawings” – 25%
 10%  Remove “Test(s)”
  “Test(s)” – 15%
44 Table 2: SBA Table 2: SBA
  “ALL tests” – 30  “ALL tests” – 15 (3.75%)
 (7.5%)  “Mid-year exam” – 20 (5%)
  “Mid-year exam” –  “Prep. exam.” – 35 (8.75%)
 15 (3.75%)
  “Prep. exam.” – 25
 (6.25%)
 1.12 ENGLISH

Page HL FAL Captured As Corrected

10, x The heading (skill) The sub-headings Listening (19) and
19 Listening and Speaking (21) should not be printed in capital
and Speaking) and the letters. Furthermore, they should be printed in
21 sub-headings a smaller font than that of the main heading.
 Listening (19) and
 Speaking (21) are The word (subheading) Speaking must be
 all printed in capital printed in same font as the sub-heading
 letters and in the Listening.
 same font size.

 On page 10, under
 Listening and
 Speaking, the word
 (sub-heading)
 Speaking is printed
 in the same font as
 the heading
 Listening and
 Speaking
26 x Under Drama: Recapture as tone and mood
 captured as mood
 and tone
27 x The second bullet Delete second bullet (Conflict).
 (Conflict) under the
 heading ‘The
 aspects below will
 enhance ...) must
 be deleted.
 Recapture as follows: The role of
 narrator/persona/point of view
 Under novel: Only
 ‘The role of the Recapture as Tone and mood
 narrator’ captured.

 Under novel, only
 ‘Mood’ captured Capture as ‘Tone and mood’ separately, and,
 ‘Ironic twist/ending’

 Under novel,
 captured as ‘mood,
 ironic twist/ ending’
27 x Suggested Include unprepared speaking under Text
 duration of oral (below prepared speaking) and time allocation
 communication: of 1-2 minutes.
 Texts –
 Unprepared
 speaking not
 included
70 x Weeks 5 & 6. Literary text 4
 Missing number
 (Literary text).
72 x Weeks 11 & 12. Include direct and reported speech under the
 Crucial language ‘Language and conventions’ column.
 structure omitted.
84 X Any Two of the Any Two of the following:
 following: Novel/drama/short story (contextual
 Novel/drama/short questions)/poetry
 story Remove essay
 (essay/contextual
 questions)/poetry
 x Teaching plan - Refer to Literature study in both HL and FAL
 Reading and (and SAL)
 Viewing:
 The HL refers to
 Literature study
 while the FAL
 refers to Literary
 text (1 – 18)
 1.13 GEOGRAPHY
Page No. Content to be corrected Correction
08 Section 2.2. wording fostering
 “ostering”
56, 57 & 58 Exam outline P 2 - Analysis and interpretation of a
 Question 3 Analysis and topographic map, orthophoto map and
 interpretation of a a photograph, and application of theory
 topographic map and a
 photograph, and
 application of theory
12 Grade 12 topic 4: Economic Geography of South Africa
 Economic geography of
 South Africa:
43 Fluvial processes: superimposed... rivers
 superimposed...drainage
 patterns
43 Drainage Systems in ‘use of topographic maps to identify
 South Africa: ‘use of stream order as well as on topics
 topographic maps to above where possible’
 identify stream order
 and density; and’
47 Secondary and South Africa’s main industrial regions
 Tertiary Sectors:
  South Africa’s
 industrial regions
50 4.3.1. CASS (25%) SBA (25%)
53 4.4.1. Programme of Weighted Marks
 Assessment -
 ‘Marks’
55 Codes and percentages Alignment amongst the three
 for recording and documents
 reporting
 1.14 HISTORY

Page Content to be Correction
number/ corrected
Topic
Pg. 27 , Key question: How Key question: How was independence realised in
39, 46 – was independence Africa in the 1960s and 1980s
Topic 2 realised in Africa in the
 1960s and 1970s
Pg. 12, Topic heading: Civil Topic heading: Civil Society Protest 1950s-1970s
28, 39 Society Protest 1950s- Key question: What forms of civil society protest
and 47 1970s emerged from the 1950s to 1970s?
Topic 3 Key question: What
 forms of civil society
 protest emerged from
 the 1960s to 1990?
Pg. 12, Topic heading: Civil Topic heading: Civil Resistance in South Africa
29, 40 Resistance in South late 1960s to 1980s
and 48 Africa 1970s to 1980
Topic 4
Pg. 30 Negotiated settlement Refer to timeline attached for time and
and 49 and Government of chronology
Topic 5 National Unity
Pg. 31, Key question: How Key question: How has the world changed since
40 and has the world changed the 1980s?
50 since the 1960s?
Topic 6
Pg. 29 Topic 4: Civil Topic 4: Civil resistance in South Africa 1970s to
 resistance in South 1980s
 Africa 1970s to 1980
 The Soweto uprising The Soweto uprising is not studied in full here,
 is not studied in full because it was covered in grade 9.
 here, because it was
 it was covered in
 grade 9.
 Introduction Introduction
 Reads: Should read:
  Opposition –  Opposition – underground, in prison and exile
 underground, in  Support for the anti-apartheid struggle in Africa
 prison and in exile – frontline states (eg. Angola…..
  Support for the
 anti-apartheid
 struggle in Africa –
 frontline states (
 Angola…..
Pg. 30 The coming of The road to democracy in South Africa and
 democracy in South coming to terms with the past
 Africa and coming to
 terms with the past
Pg. 31 A New world order
 Conclusion Conclusion
 This includes a This includes a discussion on the following:
 discussion on What  What have we learnt….
 have we learnt….
 4.4.3 GLOBAL ASSESSMENT OF ESSAYS: TOTAL MARKS: 50

 4.3 Formal Assessment
 4.3.1 Cognitive Levels and abilities covered during formal assessment
 Formal assessment must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners,
 as shown below:

 Cognitive Levels Source-based assessment questions and tasks

 LEVEL 1 (L1)  Extract evidence from sources

  Explain historical concepts

 LEVEL 2 (L2)  Straight forward interpretation of the sources

  What is being said by the author or creator of the source? What are
 the views or opinions on an issue expressed by the source?

  Compare information in sources.

 LEVEL 3 (L3)  Interpret and evaluate information and data from sources

  Engaged with questions of bias, reliability and usefulness of sources

  Compare and contrast interpretations and perspectives within
 sources and by authors of sources
 LEVEL 7 LEVEL 6 LEVEL 5 LEVEL 4 LEVEL 3 LEVEL 2 LEVEL 1
 Very well Very well Well planned Planned and Shows some Attempts to Little or no
 planned and planned and and structured constructed an evidence of a structure an attempt to
 structured structured essay. argument. planned and answer. structure the
 essay. essay. Attempts to Evidence is constructed Largely essay.
 Good synthesis Developed a develop a clear used to some argument. descriptive, or
 of information. relevant line of argument. extent to Attempts to some attempt
 Developed an argument. Conclusion support the line sustain a line of at developing a
PRESENTATION
 original, well Evidence used drawn from the of argument argument. line of
 balanced and to defend the evidence to Conclusions Conclusions not argument. No
 independent argument. support the line reached based clearly attempt to draw
 line of Attempts to of argument. on evidence. supported by a conclusion
 argument with draw an evidence.
 the use of independent
 evidence, conclusion.
 CONTENT
 sustained and from the
 defended the evidence to
 argument support the line
 throughout. of argument.
 Independent
 conclusion is
 drawn from
 evidence to
 support the line
 of argument.

LEVEL 7
Question has
been fully
answered.
Content 47-50 43-46
selection fully
relevant to line
of argument.
LEVEL 6
Question has
been answered.
Content
 43-46 40-42 38-39
selection
relevant to the
line of
argument.
 LEVEL 5
Question
answered to a
great extent.
 38-39 36-37 34-35 30-33
Content
adequately
covered and
relevant.
LEVEL 4
Question is
recognisable in
answer.
Some 30-33 28-29 26-27
omissions or
irrelevant
content
selection.
LEVEL 3
Content
selection does
relate to the
question, but
does not
 26-27 24-25 20-23
answer it, or
does not
always relate to
the question.
Omissions in
coverage.

LEVEL 2
Question
inadequately 20-23 18-19 14-17
addressed.
Sparse content.

LEVEL 1
Question
inadequately
addressed or
 14-17 0-13
not at all.
Inadequate or
irrelevant
content.
 1.15 HOSPITALITY STUDIES

Page Language Content to be corrected Correction
No.
 Eng / Afr

19 English ..minerals (calcium, iron, …minerals (calcium, iron, magnesium
 magnesium) and phosphorus)

19 Afrikaans minerale (kalsium, yster, minerale (kalsium, yster, magnesium
 magnesium) en fosfor)

21 English Cooking methods: boiling, Cooking methods: boiling, poaching,
 poaching, scrambling shallow frying
Wk 4

Wk 4 Afrikaans Gaarmaakmetodes: kook, Gaarmaakmetodes: kook, posjeer en
 posjeer en roer, braai, vlakbraai
 omelette

23 English House rules for the Remove the content
 schools restaurant could
Wk 3
 apply

23 Afrikaans Huisreëls van die skool se Remove the content
 restaurant geld
wk 3

33 English Awareness of ingredients Awareness of ingredients that causes
 that causes allergic allergic reactions, or are a health risk
Wk 1
 reactions, or are a health for diabetics, HIV Aids, cholesterol
 risk for e.g. diabetics, to and hypertension to
 be able to inform guests be able to inform guests

33 Afrikaans Bewustheid van Bewustheid van bestanddele wat
 bestanddele wat allergiese reaksies veroorsaak of ‘n
Wk 1
 allergiese reaksies gesondheidsrisiko inhou, soos vir
 veroorsaak of ‘n diabetes, MIV - Vigs, cholesterol en
 gesondheidsrisiko inhou, hoë –bloeddruk om in staat te wees
 soos bv. vir diabetes, om om gaste in te lig
 in staat te wees om gaste
 in te lig
33 Afrikaans Insert the information in Spyskaart beplanning vir formele etes
 the next column en banket etes
Wk 1

40 English Test: Theory of practical Test

Term
3

42 English 4.4.5 ( bullet 6) This statement must be removed
 from the policy document
 These tasks should take
 place outside the four
 hours per week
 allocated to the subject.

42 Afrikaans 4.4.5 (bullet 6)

 Die restaurantfunksies
 moet buite die normale
 skoolure plaasvind

2 Afrikaans 4.7. Moderering van 4.7. Moderering van assessering
 assessering
 4.7.1. Formele assessering (SBA)

 4.7.2. Praktiese assessering

9 2.4.1 2.4.1 Change case of bulleted items

15 3.2. Sien Afdeling 3 3.2.Sien Afdeling 4

16 Choux pastry: Cream To be deleted
 puffs with éclairs
Term
1
grade
12

18 Bold:

 waste management:…

 kitchen pests:…

19 Afrikaans  vlakbraai, diepbraai, remove bullet but keep content
 rooster, roerbraai
19 Les 4 Les 4
 Mesvaardighede. Mesvaardighede.
 Vrugteslaai, Vrugteslaai,
 gestoofde vrugte, gestoofde vrugte,
 vrugtejellie

22 Les 8 Les 8
Wk 6 Produkte waar Produkte waar
 klontvorming ‘n klontvorming ‘n
 risiko is, soos risiko is, soos
 melktert (maak melktert (maak
 met broskors met broskors
 of koekiekors of koekiekors
 of gebruik of gebruik
 kommersiële kommersiële
 bevrore deeg) bevrore deeg)
 Blancmange Blancmange
 Panacotta
Pg Tee Tee
22 • Standaard/Ceylon/swart  Standaard/Ceylon/swart tee,
Week tee, suurlemoentee, ystee,
7 suurlemoentee, ystee, spesialiteitstee, kruietee,
 spesialiteitstee, kruietee, vrugtetee, chai tee
 vrugtetee, chai tee Koffie
 Koffie • Filterkoffie, espresso, kaffiënvrye
 • Filterkoffie, espresso, koffie, yskoffie,
 kaffiënvrye koffie, yskoffie, cappuccino, latte, café mocha, Ierse
 cappuccino, latte, café koffie, café au lait
 mocha, Ierse koffie, café • Vermenging en maal van koffiebone
 au lait • Voorbereiding en bediening van tee
 • Vermenging en maal en koffie
 van koffiebone
 • Voorbereiding en
 bediening van tee en
 koffie
 • Berging van tee en
 koffie.
23 Beplan spyskaarte vir Beplan spyskaarte vir
 • Ontbyt: Engelse- en • Ontbyt: Engelse- en kontinentale
Wk 4
 kontinentale ontbyt ontbyt
 • Laatontbyt en ligte • Laatontbyt en ligte maaltye
 maaltye • Gee aandag aan kreatiwiteit en
 • Gee aandag aan huidige tendense.
 kreatiwiteit en huidige
 tendense.
 • Gebruik plaaslik
 beskikbare kommoditeite
24 Maalvleis en worsies Maalvleis en wors
 • Verwys na  Verwys na voedselpiramide vir
Wk 6
 voedselpiramide vir  voedingswaarde
 voedingswaarde  Tipes maalvleis: bees, ander
 • Tipes maalvleis: bees,  Tipes worsies: bees, vark,
 ander  spesialiteitsworsies
 • Tipes worsies: bees,  Faktore om in ag te neem by
 vark,  die aankoop van maalvleis
 spesialiteitsworsies  en worsies (vars en bevrore)
 • Faktore om in ag te  Berging van maalvleis en wors
 neem by  Gaarmaakmetodes: rooster
 die aankoop van (nie buite oor vuur nie), braai,
 maalvleis prut
 en worsies (vars en  Porsiegroottes
 bevrore)  Gebruike van maalvleis en
 • Gaarmaakmetodes:  wors: hoofgeregte,
 rooster  versnaperings,vulsels,
 (nie buite oor vuur nie), hamburgers, ens.
 braai,
 prut
 • Porsiegroottes
 • Gebruike van maalvleis
 en
 worsies: hoofgeregte,
 versnaperings, vulsels,
 hamburgers, ens.

25 Basiese behandeling van Basiese behandeling van
 Wk 1 beserings wat algemeen beserings wat algemeen voorkom in
 voorkom in die die gasvryheidsbedryf
 gasvryheidsbedryf
 (eerste hulp) : brandwonde
 (eerste hulp) : (verskillende tipes), snye, elektriese
 brandwonde (verskillende skok, verstuitings,
 tipes), snye, elektriese
 floutes, skok, allergiese reaksies
 skok, verstuitings,

 floutes, skok, allergiese
 reaksies

 Algemene veiligheids praktyke in
 die kombuis en restaurant met
 betrekking tot elektriese apparaat,
 gas, stoom, messe, chemikaliee
 (skoonmaakmiddels)

25 Die funksionele posisies Die funksionele posisies in die
Wk 3 in die kamerafdeling (vir kamerafdeling (vir werksgeleenthede)
 werksgeleenthede) Rolle, verantwoordelikhede en
 Rolle, interverwantskap:
 verantwoordelikhede en • Kamerafdelingsbestuurder
 interverwantskap: • Voorkantoorbestuurder
 • -- Ontvangspersoneel
 Kamerafdelingsbestuurder -- Besprekingspersoneel
 • Voorkantoorbestuurder -- Toonbankassistente
 -- Ontvangspersoneel -- Kommunikasie en PBX operateur
 -- Besprekingspersoneel
 -- Toonbankassistente
 -- Portiere - hulp aan
 gaste
 -- Kommunikasie en PBX
 operateur
Wk 4 Instandhoudingsbetuurder Instandhoudingsbetuurder

 • Uitvoerende huishouer • Uitvoerende huishouer

 -- Kamerbediende -- Kamerassistent

 -- Linne assistent -- Linne assistent

 -- Wasgoedassistent -- Wasgoedassistent

 -- Publieke area -- Publieke area assistente
 assistente

27 Aanbieding (as geheel en Aanbieding en gebruike
 individueel)
Wk 6
-7 • Gebruike

29 Verdikkingsmiddels, Verdikkingsmiddels,
 verdikkingsmetodes verdikkingsmetodes,gebruike,
Wk 6
 porsiegroottes
&7 • Gebruike

 • Porsiegroottes

30 Kulturele kookkuns erfenis Kulturele kookkuns erfenis van
 van Suid Afrika Suid Afrika
Week
1

30 Les 11 Les 11
 Diepvetgebraaide Diepvetgebraaide
Wk 5
 pampoenpoffertjies pampoenpoffertjies
 met karramelsous, met karamelsous,
 aartappel krokkette, aartappel krokkette,
 duchesse duchesse
 aartappels, aartappels,
 geroosterde geroosterde
 groentes, ratatouille groentes, ratatouille
 Bedien met geskikte Bedien met geskikte
 souse souse
31 Les 12 Les 12
 Hoender en rysslaai, Rys timbale, risotto, rysslaai, confetti
wk 6
 hoender paella, ens. rys
32 Wette aangaande Wette aangaande
 werksomstandighede in werksomstandighede in die
wk 3
 die gasvryheidsbedryf gasvryheidsbedryf
 Basiese inligting Basiese inligting (waarvoor die wette
 (waarvoor die wette staan staan en op wie is dit van toepassing)
 en op wie is dit van Departement van Arbeid:
 toepassing) www.labour.gov.za
 Departement van Arbeid:  Die wet op Basiese
 www.labour.gov.za Diensvoorwaardes
  Die wet op Basiese  Wet op Beroepsgesondheid en -
 Diensvoorwaardes Veiligheid ( OHSA)
  Algemene  Algemene Veiligheidsregulasies
 Veiligheidsregulasies R1031
 R1031  Higiëne Regulasies R918
  Higiëne Regulasies
 R918
Pg Die Wet op Die Wet op Beroepsgesondheid en
32 Beroepsgesondheid en - -veiligheid (OHSA)
 veiligheid (OHSA) Doel van wet (OHSA)
Wk 4
 Doel van wet (OHSA) Strafmaatreels indien jy nalaat om
 Strafmaatreels indien jy aan vereistes te voldoen
 nalaat om aan vereistes Gevolge van swak higiëne
 te voldoen
 Gevolge van swak
 higiëne
Wk 5 Loopbaangeleenthede in Loopbaangeleenthede in die
 die gasvryheidsindustrie gasvryheidsindustrie
  Universiteite en  Universiteite en Universiteite van
 Universiteite van Tegnologie (hoër onderwys)
 Tegnologie (hoër  Eenheidstandaard - gebaseerde
 onderwys) leerprogramme deur die Kultuur,
  Eenheidstandaard - Kunste, Toerisme,
 gebaseerde  Gasvryheid en Sport Sektor
 leerprogramme deur Opvoeding En Opleiding Outoriteit
 die Kultuur, Kunste, (CATHSSETA
 Toerisme, voorheen THETA)
  Gasvryheid en Sport  Kolleges vir Verdere Onderwys en
 Sektor Opvoeding En Opleiding (FET)
 Opleiding Outoriteit  Geregistreerde privaatinstansies
 (CATHSSETA
 voorheen THETA).
 Kolleges vir Verdere
 Onderwys en Opleiding
 (FET)
 Geregistreerde
 privaatinstansies
42 Section E: Sectors and Section D: Sectors and careers.
 careers. Food and Food and beverage service
 beverage service

 Kognitiewe vlak Kognitiewe vlak
 Lae orde: kennis Lae orde: onthou
 Middelorde: Begrip en Middelorde:verstaan en toepassing
 toepassing Hoë orde: analisering, evaluasering
 Hoë orde: analise, en skeppend
 evaluasie en sintese
40 Tabel 1 (a) Formele Tabel 1 (a) Formele Assessering
 Assessering graad 10 graad 10 en 11
 en 11
 Termyn 3 Termyn 3
 Toets/oopboektoets 25% Toets/oopboektoets 25%
 Rekordeksamen 75% *Rekordeksamen 50%
 Praktiese take 25%
40 Tabel 1 (b) Formele Tabel 1 (b) Formele Assessering
 Assessering graad 12
 graad 12
 Toets/oopboektoets 25%
 *Rekordeksamen 50% Toets/oopboektoets 25%
 Praktiese take 25% Rekordeksamen 75%

15 English Filter Coffee (plunger and Filter Coffee (plunger and percolator -
 percolator) combine with other commodities)

15 English Eggs: Baked custard and Baked custard and variations such as
 variations such as caramel and chocolate , crème
 caramel and chocolate brûlée, crème anglaise

 Soft meringue: Queen of bread
 pudding, lemon meringue tart

 Hard meringue: vacherin, nests,
 rosettes

17 English Add to last bullet Awareness of how to combat global
 warming
 44 English For promotion and For promotion and certification
 certification purposes, purposes, learners should achieve at
 learners should achieve at least a level 2 rating (elementary
 least a level 2 rating achievement:
 (elementary achievement:
 30 - 39%) in Hospitality Studies
 30 - 39%) in Tourism.
 1.25 LIFE SCIENCES

Page No. Content to be corrected Correction

55 Observe and draw prepared Observe and draw prepared microscope slides,
 microscope slides, micrographs or models of cells in selected stages of meiotic
 micrographs or models of cell division, e.g., crossing over in prophase I;
 cells in selected stages of metaphase I; anaphase I, metaphase II, telophase II.
 meiotic cell division, e.g.
 crossing over in metaphase
 I; anaphase I, metaphase II,
 telophase II.
Page No. Content to be corrected Correction

70 Under the content heading it Specific Aims 1, 2 and 3 should be covered in tests,
 is mentioned that the skills examinations and project/assignment.
 listed under Specific Aims 1
 and 3 should be assessed in
 the 4 tests, examinations and
 the project/assignment. Secondly only 3 tests (and not 4) are listed under the
 heading SBA
 Page Content to be corrected Correction
No.

59 On page 59 under the All schools should write a Mid-year examination only. There
and heading ‘Assessment’ it is should be no option of substituting the mid-year examination with
70 stated that a ‘mid-year a control test.
 examination (2½ hours) or
 control test’ should be
 completed by the end of
 term 2.
 Secondly on page 70 under
 the heading ‘School-based
 assessment’ it is stated that
 a ‘Mid-year examination
 OR control test’’ could be
 done in term 2. Below the
 Programme of formal
 assessment it is stated that
 ‘Schools that are
 performing well (above an
 80% pass rate in the
 previous year) may elect
 not to write the mid-year
 examination’.
Page Content to be corrected Correction
No.

70 Under the heading ‘School- The practical task listed under term 3 and 4 should be part of the
 based assessment’ it is year mark.
 stated that ‘one selected
 practical task will not be
 included in the year mark’
 in term 3 and 4.
70 Under the heading ‘School- Exclude Environmental studies: fieldwork in term 3 and 4.
 based assessment’ it is
 stated that ‘Environmental
 studies: fieldwork’ is part
 of SBA in term 3 and 4.
70 Under the heading ‘School- Change the total percentage for term 1, 2 and 3 to 33⅓%
 based assessment’ it is
 stated that the total
 percentages under term 1,
 2 and 3 is 33.

Page 70 should after corrections read as follows:
Grade 12
PROGRAMME OF FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 TRIAL: END-OF-YEAR
 INTERNAL EXAMINATION
FORMAL, RECORDED, SCHOOL-BASED 50%
 Two written examinations
ASSESSMENTS
Content Practical
 • Three tests (minimum of 50 marks each) A selection of three These exams+test
 (2½ hours 2½knowledge
 hours)
 representative practical of content, concepts and skills
 • One mid-year examination (2½ hours, 150 tasks, which cover the across all topics. Knowledge of
 marks) range of skills, must be practical work as well as some of
 marked and recorded. the skills related to practical work
 • One trial examination (2 x 2½ hours, 300 (The marks allocated for a must be assessed in the written
 marks) practical task should range examination
 School-based assessment (during the year)
Term 1 Term 2 from
 Term 203toand
 40).Term 4
• One project/assignment (can be done in any
 term: 100 The range of skills is

 marks in term 3). described in Specific Aim 2.

 • Skills are listed under Specific Aims 1, 2
 • One test • One test • One test

• One selected practical • One selected • One selected practical
 task practical task
 33⅓% 33⅓ 33⅓%
 task  project/assignment
 %
 Convert to 50% 50%

  Mid-year
Note: The year mark will be converted to 25% and the external examination will count 75% of the final mark.
 examinatio
 The trial (preliminary) examination
 n
Page No. Content to be Correction should be set on the work
 corrected completed in Terms 1, 2 and 3.

10 In the table ‘Life Add the topic ‘Genetics and Inheritance’
 Sciences: Concept under the heading ‘Life at molecular, cellular
 and Content and tissue level Grade 12’
 Progression’ under
 the heading ‘Life at
 molecular, cellular
 and tissue level Grade
 12’ the topic ‘Genetics
 and Inheritance’ was
 omitted.
 1.26 MATHEMATICAL LITERACY

Page No. Content to be corrected Correction

24 and 72 …(e.g. school) …(e.g. classroom)
59 Net pay and tax rebate are not They must be removed from the documents
 documents needed for the taxation section
75 and 77
 Refer to MATHEMATICAL LITERACY ANNEXURE A
86 Under Additional comments, first paragraph, Under Additional comments, first
editorial captured as, paragraph, should be captured as,
 “Learners are not expected to draw pie charts in “Learners are not expected to draw pie
 an examination.” charts in a Formal Assessment Task.”
105 The policy is silent on the minimum mark for the It is recommended that the minimum
 control tests. should be 50 marks.
106 Under comments on mark allocation, second Under comments on mark allocation,
 line, captured as, “it is not anticipated that one- second line, it should be captured as, “it
 mark questions will be included in the is not anticipated that one-mark questions
 examination.” will be included in the Formal
 Assessment Task”
 111 The weighting of tasks in quarterly reporting is For quarterly reporting purposes as
 not specified (an omission, to be inserted as the contemplated in Section 17(1) of the
 last part of Paragraph 4.5) National Protocol for Assessment Grades
 R-12, the tasks within a quarter should
 weigh as in accordance with their ratio
 towards the SBA mark. In Grades 10-11
 the Assignment/Investigation should
 constitute 40% of the Term 1 report mark
 with the Control Test constituting 60%
 (since the ratio between the
 Assignment/Investigation and the Control
 Test in Term 1 is 10:15 = 2:3).

 Similarly, the weighting of tasks in the
 other two term reports should be as
 follows:

 Term 2: 25% Assignment/Investigation
 and 75% Examination.
 Term 3: 40% Assignment/Investigation
 and 60% Control Test.
 This principle shall also apply to Grade
 12 as follows:

 Term 1: 33,33% Assignment; 33,33%
 Investigation; 33,33% Control Test.
 (This is equivalent to the average
 percentage of the three tasks)
 Term 2: 30% Assignment/Investigation
 and 70% Examination.
 Term 3: 30% Control Test and 70%
 Examination.

 ALTERNATIVELY: The DBE to consider
 providing a directive that will be
 applicable to all subjects.
07(Table ‘Mathematics’ ‘Mathematics/Mathematical Literacy’
1.4.4)
13, Figure The diagram is ‘In Front of Text’ The diagram has to be ‘dragged’ down so
2. that it comes after the hidden text.
14, ‘see section 4.2 below for more details’ ‘see section 4.4.2 for more details’
comment
in
 brackets
on the
second
line.
15 and 17 In section 2.5 the word “work schedule” is used The word work schedule and teaching
 for grade 10 and 11 and captured as a plan in section 2.5 should be changed to
 “teaching plan” for grade 12 “annual teaching plan” in grade 10,11
 and 12
28 ‘1 million = 1 000 00’ ‘1 million = 1 000 000’
36 The suggested teaching time for patterns The teaching time for patterns,
 ,relationship and representation in grade 10 is relationship and representation in Grade
 captured as ‘4-5 weeks’ 10 should be ‘3-4 weeks’.
38 No. of 1 2 3 4 No. of 1 2 3 4
 teachers … teachers …
 Cost per R2 200,00 R1 600,00 Cost per R2 200,00 R1 100,00
 teacher teacher
49 In section ‘Financial documents’ below ‘In order
 to’, the financial documents are listed as if they
 Refer to MATHEMATICAL LITERACY
 are all applicable to grades 10,11 and 12.
 ANNEXURE A

50 The grade(s) for the content and context of the “Grades 10, 11 and 12” to be inserted on
 section ‘Tariff systems’ is not indicated. the far right, corresponding to the
 content and context of the section ‘Tariff
 systems’.
54 There are two dotted lines on this page. The first The first dotted line is to be removed.
 dotted line leaves the content above it with no
 grade indication.
63 ‘mm³, cm³, m²to ml and litres’ ‘mm³, cm³, m³ to ml and litres’
 Refer to MATHEMATICAL LITERACY
 ANNEXURE A
79 Section on Models, line separating grade 10 and A line should be drawn after the
 11 content is not drawn application topic of grade 10 (only),
 above “make and use”
109, ‘see Table 5 on page 99 above’ ‘see Table 5 on page 108, subject to
comment further clarity provided below’
in
brackets
on last
bullet.
110, ‘Contexts focusing on Finance (Financial ‘Contexts focusing on Finance (Financial
Table 8 docuyments and Tariff systems)’. documents and Tariff systems)’.
 1.27 MATHEMATICS (FET)

Page No. Content to be corrected Correction

p18 Finance and growth (15 Finance and growth (10 marks)
 marks)

P18 Number Patterns (10 Number Patterns (15 marks)
 marks)

P18 (grade 10) Euclidean Geometry and Euclidean Geometry and measurement (30
 measurement (20 marks) marks)

P18 Trigonometry (50 marks) Trigonometry (40 marks)

P19 Euclidean Geometry and Euclidean Geometry and measurement (50
 measurement (40 marks) marks)

P19 Trigonometry (60 marks) Trigonometry (50 marks)

P24 1. The concept of a 1. The concept of a function…(input value)
 function…(input value) should be emphasized

P15 (grade 12) Proof and use of the Prove the identity
 compound angle and cos(  )  cos  cos   sin  sin  and derive

 double angle identities. other compound angle identities
P15 (grade 11) (d) Establish the sine, Prove and apply the sine, cosine and area
 cosine and area rules. rules
P22 … (without using a … (without using a formula)
 formula-see content
 overview)
P24 (grade 10) … and y  sin  ..... y  tan .......

number 4
P28 Trigonometry (2 weeks); Trigonometry (2 weeks); Euclidean
 Euclidean geometry (1 geometry (1 week); Measurement (1 week)
 week); Measurement (2
 week)
P28 Diagram not labeled Label EFGH and MFNH
P30 1. Complete the square. 1. Solve:
 2. Quadratic equations 1.1 Quadratic equations (by
 (by factorization and factorization, completing
 using quadratic formula). the square and using
 3. Quadratic inequalities quadratic formula).
 in one unknown
 (Interpret solutions 1.2 Quadratic inequalities in
 graphically). one unknown (Interpret
 solutions graphically).
 NB: It is recommended
 that the solving of 1.3 Equations in two
 equations in two unknowns, one of which
 unknowns is important to is linear and the other
 be used in other quadratic.
 equations like hyperbola-
 straight line as this is NB: It is recommended that
 normal in the case of the solving of equations
 graphs. in two unknowns is
 important to be used in
 4. Equations in two other equations like
 unknowns, one of which hyperbola-straight line as
 is linear and the other this is normal in the case
 quadratic. of graphs.

 5. Nature of roots
 2. Determine the nature of roots and the
 conditions for which the roots are real,
 non-real, equal, unequal, rational and
 irrational.

P32 no 3 … and y  sin  ..... y  tan .......

P32 bullet no 2 Two parameters at a Two parameters at a time can be varied in
under time can be varied in tests or examinations in trigonometric
clarification tests or examinations. graphs only.

P32 y  a tan k(x  p) at most y  a tan k(x  p)

 two parameters at a at most two parameters at a time.
 time.
P38 5. The use of contingency tables to solve
 probability problems for three events in a
 sample space
P39 Identification of outliers Identification of outliers should be done in
 should be done in the the context of box and whisker diagrams.
 context of a scatter plot
 as well as the box and
 whisker diagrams.
P44 T

 x x Q
 y P y
 150  150

 a a

 R

P42 Given that a population 1. Given that a population increased from
 increased from 120 000 120 000 to 214 000 in 10 years, at what
 to 214 000 in 10 years, annual (compound) rate did the
 at what annual population grow? (R)
 (compound) rate did the
 population grow? (R) 2. In order to buy a car, John takes out a
 1. In order to buy a car, loan of R25 000 from the bank. The
 John takes out a loan of bank charges an annual interest rate of
 R25 000 from the bank. 11%, compounded monthly. The
 The bank charges an instalments start a month after he has
 annual interest rate of received the money from the bank.
 11%, compounded 2.1 Calculate his monthly
 monthly. The instalments instalments if he has
 start a month after he to pay back the loan
 has received the money over a period of
 from the bank. 5 years. (R)
 1.1 Calculate his 2.2 Calculate the
 monthly instalments if he outstanding balance
 has to pay back the loan of his loan after two
 over a period of 5 years. years (immediately
 (R) after the 24th
 1.2 Calculate the instalment). (C)
 outstanding balance of
 his loan after two years
 (immediately after the
 24th instalment). (C)
P43 Example of an 1.1 Example of an investigation which
 investigation which revises the sine, cosine and area rules:
 revises the sine, cosine
 1.2 Investigation: Polygons with 12
 and area rules:
 Matches
 Grade 12 Investigation:
 Polygons with 12
 Matches
P43 Assessment Note:
P45 3.3 f (x)  c . 3.4 f (x)  c .
P55 in the table Modelling as a process Modelling as a process should be included
 should be included in all in all papers, thus contextual questions can
 papers, thus contextual be set on any topic.
 questions can be set on Trigonometric functions will be examined in
 any topic. paper 2.
Page No. Content to be corrected Correction

P12 (grade 11) A = P(1 + in) A = P(1 - in)

P14 (grade 10) P(A or B) = P(A) +(B) – P(A or B) = P(A) +P(B) – P(A and B)
 P(A and B)

P15 (grade 11) sin 2   sin 2   1 sin2   cos2   1

P22 Numbers and patterns Number patterns
P26 (grade 10) … formulae A = P(1 + in) … formulae A = P(1 + in) and A = P(1 + i)n
 and A = P(1 + i)n]
P31 no 1 … though … … through …
P34 no 2 on there is “x” on the “x” must be deleted
the diagram diagram
P37
 .... ADC   .... … ADˆ C   ….
P38 no 1 P(A or B)=PA +P(B) P(A or B)=P(A)+P(B)

P40 .
 Show that 0,99 9  1 .
 Show that 0,9999=1.
P41 2. 4 Determine the 2. 4 Determine the function h if the graph
 function h if the graph of h is the reflection of the graph of f
 of h is the reflection of about the y -axis. (C)
 the graph of f through 2.5 Determine the function k if the graph of
 the y -axis. (C) k is the reflection of the graph of f about
 2.5 Determine the the x -axis. (C)
 function k if the graph of
 k is the reflection of the
 graph of f through the
 x -axis. (C)
P42 cos 2  1  sin 2  cos 2  1  2 sin2 

 2. … x  2x  px  1 … 2. …  2x  px  1 …
P44 5 3 3

P45 a a
 3.3 f ( x)  3.3 f ( x)  for x  0
 x x
P45 example f (x)   x f (x)   1 , for x  0 ;
 x x
1.4
P48 no of 1 2
weeks
P49 no 2 2. probability problems 2. Probability problems using Venn
 using Venn diagrams, diagrams, tree diagrams, two-way
 trees, two-way contingency tables and other techniques to
 contingency tables and solve probability problems (where events
 other techniques (like are not necessarily independent).
 the fundamental
 counting principle) to
 solve probability
 problems (where events
 are not necessarily
 independent).

P54 bullet no 4 None graphic and none Graphic and programmable calculators are
 programmable not allowed (for example, calculators which
 calculators are allowed factorise a2  b2  (a  b)(a  b) , or find roots of
 (for example, to factorise equations are not allowed). Calculators
 a2  b2  (a  b)(a  b) , or to should only be used to perform standard
 find roots of equations numerical computations and to verify
 will be allowed. calculations by hand.
 Calculators …. hand.
 1.28 PHYSICAL SCIENCES

Page No. Content to be corrected Correction

13 Third column, fourth Change “resistor” to “resistors”
 row, line 7; incorrect
 word “resistor”

127 and Incorrect numbering Page 127: Change number “(7)” to “(8)”
128 and missing heading
 Page 128: Change number “(8)” to “(7)”

 Page 128: above paragraph “(8)” insert the
 following headings: “informal experiments”

140 Column 3, bullet 3: The statement should read: “Define
 “Define eutrophication, its causes and its effects
 eutrophication” on the ecosystem”

106 Column 3, second Remove “dimethyl ether”
 th th
 row, 6 and 12 line

104 - 116 Time in organic The hours should be made to total 12
 molecules (12 hrs) pg hours
 104incorrect

132 Clarity on cut-off Pg.132 Cut-off frequency vs threshold –
 frequency as compared Both terms to be used synonymously
 to threshold frequency

107 Fourth column, third Delete the word “different” and insert in
 line, incorrect word: its place the words “Ethyl butanoate and
 “different” methyl butanoate” also insert the
 following sentence: “these are the esters
 found in pineapple and apple.

136 First row, third Change the sentence to:
 column: missing
 “Describe
 punctuation marks
 and incorrect  the movement of ions through the
 grammar solutions,
  the electron flow in the external
 circuit of the cell,
  the half reactions at the electrodes
 and
  the function of the salt bridge in the
 galvanic cells.

144 Non-alignment of • Align words in table 1, column 2 on
 word/terms on pages pg 144 with words on pages 152
 144 with 152 and 153 and153 in column 1 of appendix 1.
 Use new words in updated version of
 CAPS ( e.g. “ Evaluation, synthesis”
 on page 144 replaced with
 “creating”). The words in table 1 on
 page 144 must be changed to the
 words in appendix 1 on page 152.
 1.37 TOURISM

Page no Content to be changed Correction

18 Grade 10 term 2 week 6 Replace bullet 3 and website reference to:

English The Sho’t Left campaign to The Vaya Mzanzi campaign to promote
& promote domestic tourism in domestic tourism in South Africa
Afrikaans South Africa
 Resources: www.vayamzanzi.co.za or
 Resources: vayamzanzi.mobi
 www.southafrica.net/shotleft
 or SA Tourism call centre: 083
 123 6789

25 Grade 11 term 2 week 1 and Replace with latest (2012-2020) DTGS
 2. Domestic Tourism Growth
English *see addendum below
 strategy (DTGS)
&
Afrikaans The Domestic Tourism
 Growth Strategy - DTGS
 (latest version)
 • Concept: growth strategy
 • Objectives for promoting
 domestic tourism: sustainable
 tourism sector growth and
 development, tourism sector
 transformation, people
 empowerment and job
 creation
 • Ways to meet objectives
 such as increasing
 expenditure (more trips,
 length of stay, average
trip expenditure), reducing
seasonality (year- round
travel, more trips outside of
school
holidays), improving the
geographic spread of tourism
(more trips to less popular
provinces),
increasing volumes (get more
South Africans to travel),
utilising events to encourage
year-round
travel, improving safety and
reducing crime
The seven domestic travel
market segments according to
the Domestic Tourism Growth
Strategy
• Concepts: segments,
segment profiles, established
segments, emerging
segments, untapped
segments
• Reasons for segmentation of
domestic tourists
• The seven segments: young
and upcoming, independent
young couples and families,
striving
families, well-off homely
 couples, home-based low-
 income couples, older families
 with basic
 needs, golden active couples
 (focus on the profile of the
 segment and the type of
 holiday/
 travel they prefer)
 • Segment statistics: size of
 the segment, when they
 travel, length of stay, who
 they travel with,
 transport they use
 • Match the segments to the
 seven products: city breaks,
 mountain escapes, coastal
 getaways,
 bush retreats, countryside
 meanders, cultural
 discoveries, event wonders
32 Grade 12 Term 1 Suggestions Remove bullet 3
 for project in term 1

 Conduct a customer
 satisfaction survey for a
 tourism-related business in
 your town. Design the survey
 questionnaire.

 Analyse the findings and write
 a report for the owner of the
 business.

33 Grade12 term 2 week 4:
 United Kingdom: *Big Ben (Palace of
English United Kingdom: *Big Ben
 Westminster*), Buckingham Palace, Tower
& (Palace of Westminster*),
 of London*, Tower
Afrikaans Buckingham Palace, Tower of
 Bridge
 London*, London
 Bridge

40 Table referring to Cognitive Add Grade 10-12 to the heading Cognitive
 levels levels
English
&
Afrikaans

41 Heading: Add Grade 10-12 to the heading
English Examinations. Remove the word external
 4.4.3 Examinations
&
Afrikaans

41 Omission guidance on Include omission guidance table** on
English structure of the midyear structure of the midyear examinations
& examinations
Afrikaans

41 Missing heading Insert heading exactly above the table:
English
 Layout for final end-of-the-year
&
 examination papers Grade 10-12
Afrikaans
 ADDENDUM TO CAPS (ENGLISH VERSION)

 Grade 11 term 2 (page 25)
Week Topic Content
1 Domestic, The domestic tourism Growth Strategy (DTGS) 2012 –
 regional 2020
 and  The state of domestic tourism in South Africa
 international (explanation without any statistics)
 tourism  Why a DTGS? (problem statement and vision)(no
 statistics)
  List current trends influencing tourism, with very short
 explanation
  The domestic marketing campaign
2 Domestic,  The five (5) domestic market segments. Focus on the
 regional profile of the segment, why they travel (or not) and the
 and type of travel/holiday they prefer (no % needed)
 international  The four strategic objectives and targets of the DTGS
 tourism and the implementation plan to meet these objectives.
 List and shortly explain the activities/actions (no
 statistics, role players or time frames))

 *ADDENDUM TO CAPS (AFRIKAANS VERSION)

 Graad 11 kwartaal 2 (bladsy 25)
 Week Onderwerp Inhoud
 1 Plaaslike, Die Plaaslike Toerisme Groeistrategie
 streeks en (PTGS) 2012-2020
 internasionale  Die stand van plaaslike toerisme in Suid-Afrika
 toerisme (verduideliking sonder enige statistiek)
  Waarom ’n PTGS? (probleemstelling en visie)
 (geen statistiek)
  Lys huidige tendense wat toerisme beinvloed,
 met baie kort verduideliking
  Die plaaslike bemarkingsveldtog
2 Plaaslike,  Die vyf (5) plaaslike mark segmente. Fokus op
 streeks en die profiel van die segment, waarom hul reis (of
 internasionale nie) en die tipe reis / vakansie wat hul verkies
 toerisme (geen % nodig nie)
  Die vier strategiese doelwitte en teikens van die
 PTGS en die implementeringsplan om hierdie
 doelwitte te bereik. Lys die aktiwiteite/aksies en
 gee n kort verduideliking (geen statistiek,
 rolspelers of tydraamwerke nie)
 2.1 EMS

1. Section 3:

 Sub-section 3.2 – Annual Teaching Plan

 Under “Notes”: Point 1 for the first three terms (1, 2 and 3) for Grades 7, 8 and 9
 reflects a percentage of 40% for the formal assessment task and 60% for the controlled
 test. This is incorrect and must be ignored. The 40% and 60% allocations apply only
 to term 4 for each grade.

 The word “Accounting” indicated in brackets in the “Week Column” on pages 17, 18,
 19, 20, 21 and 22 is incorrect. It should read “Financial Literacy”.

2. Section 4:

 Section: 4.3 – Formal Assessment.

 Page 25: The following sentence must be included at the end of the first paragraph:

 All formal assessment tasks must be completed under teacher supervision.

 Sub-section 4.3.2 – Formal assessment requirements for Economic and
 Management Sciences.

 Page 27: On the Chart, please note the following changes under the “Activity” section:

  For Lower order: Assessing knowledge and remembering
 It must read: Assessing remembering and understanding
  For Middle order: Assessing understanding and application
 It must read:Assessing applying and analysing
  Higher order: Analysing, evaluating and creating
 It must read: Assessing evaluating and creating

Page 27: The heading of the table reads “Grade 7”. It should read “Grade 7 and 8”.

Page 27: The note under the table reads:

“Total marks for the end-of-year examination for Grade 7 is 150 marks”.
It should read:
“Total marks for the end-of-year examination for Grade 7 and 8 is 150 marks.”

Page 28: The heading of the table reads: “Grade 8 and 9”.
It should read: “Grade 9”.

Page 28: The note under the table reads:

“Total marks for the end-of-year examination for Grade 8 and 9 is 200 marks”.

It should read
“Total marks for the end-of-year examination for Grade 9 is 200 marks.”

Page 30: The following sentence must be included at the end of the sentence under the
table: “Programme of Assessment”. It reads:

“The forms of assessment indicated in the Programme of Assessment above may be
substituted for any other form of assessment, with the exception of controlled tests and
the final examination.”

It should read
“The forms of assessment indicated in the Programme of Assessment above may be
substituted for any other form of assessment, with the exception of controlled tests and
the final examination. However, the total marks stipulated for the form of
assessment in the table must remain the same.”
 2.2 Mathematics SP (Grades 7 – 9)
 PAGE CURRENT VERSION (ERROR) CHANGE TO
 Page 16 Recognise and use commutative and associative properties of addition NOTE: Delete as shown by a strikethrough:
 nd
[2 Column: Properties of and multiplication for integers Recognise and use commutative and associative properties of addition
integers] and multiplication for integers

 Page 29 Transformations Include ‘rotation around a given point’ as a sub-bullet of the first
 th
 [4 Column: Grade 9] bullet under ‘- reflection in the line y = x’.
 Page 37 Teachers may choose to sequence and pace the contents differently NOTE: Delete as shown by a strikethrough and insert as shown by
[3.1 Introduction, bullet 3] from the recommendations in this section. However, cognisance should bold italics:
 be taken of the relative weighting and notional hours of the Content Teachers may choose to sequence and pace the contents differently
 Areas for this phase. within a term from the recommendations in this section. However,
 cognisance should be taken of the relative weighting and notional
 hours instructional time of the Content Areas for this phase.

 Page 41 Example f): If 20 x 5 = 110, then 110 ÷ 20 = 5 and 110 ÷ 5 = 20 If 20 x 5 = 100, then 100 ÷ 20 = 5 and 100 ÷ 5 = 20
 th
[4 Column: Clarification
 Notes]
 2 2 3 3 2
 Example e) In 900 = 5 x 3 x 2 : change 2 to 2
 3
 120 = 5 x 3 x 2 . Initially learners may write this as: 5 x 3 x 2 x 2 x 2
 2 2
 Page 42 300 = 5 x 3 x 2
 th 2 2 3
[4 Column: Clarification 900 = 5 x 3 x 2
 2
 Notes] HCF = 5 x 3 x 2 = 60 (Multiply the common prime factors of the three
 numbers)
 d) The factors of 140 are 1, 2, 5, 7, 10, 14, 28, 35, 70 and 140 Include 4 and 20 as factors of 140
 Page 43 Comparing and representing numbers in exponential form Insert ‘b’ in front of the word ‘indicates’ as follows:
 th b
[4 Column: Clarification • Learners need to understand that in the exponential form a , the Comparing and representing numbers in exponential form
 b
 Notes] number is read as ‘a to the power b’, where a is called the base and b • Learners need to understand that in the exponential form a , the
 is called the exponent or index, indicates the number of factors that are number is read as ‘a to the power b’, where a is called the base and b
 multiplied. is called the exponent or index, b indicates the number of factors that
 are multiplied.
 Page 45 - 47 Shape and Space (Geometry) Change to Space and Shape (Geometry)
 st
 [1 Column]

 Page 49 3 2 4 3 4 6
 Example: × = = Change to
 th 4 5 20 10 20 20
[4 Column: Clarification
 3 2 3 3 2 3 1 3
 Or × = 10 Change to × = × =
 Notes] 4 5 4 5 2 5 10

 Page 50 2 5 1 1 10 5
 Example b) Calculate of 6 Delete × in × 18 = 9
 th 3 3 3
[4 Column: Clarification
 Notes]
 Page 55 Example 2 In 50 x b = 20 change 20 to 200
 th 2
[4 Column: Clarification 2. If the area of a rectangle is 200 cm , and its length is 50 cm what is its
 Notes] width? Learners should write this as: 50 x b = 20 and solve by inspection
 by asking: 50 times what will be 200?
 Page 57  For conversions, note:  For conversions, note:
  if 1cm = 10cm, then 1 cm = 1 000 mm and  if 1 cm = 10 mm, then 1 cm = 1 000 mm and
 3 3 3 3
 th
[4 Column: Clarification
  if 1 m = 10cm, then 1 m = 1 000 000 mm or 1 000 000 or 10 m  if 1 m = 100 cm, then 1 m = 1 000 000 cm or 1 000 000 or
 3 3 6 3 3 3

 Notes] 6 3
 10 cm
 Page 67 Recognise and use commutative and associative properties of addition NOTE: Delete as shown by a strikethrough:
 th
[4 Column: Properties of and multiplication for integers Recognise and use commutative and associative properties of
integers] addition and multiplication for integers
 Page 76 Example f): If 20 x 5 = 110, then 110 ÷ 20 = 5 and 110 ÷ 5 = 20 If 20 x 5 = 100, then 100 ÷ 20 = 5 and 100 ÷ 5 = 20
 th
[4 Column: Clarification
 Notes]
 2 2 3 3 2
 Example e) In 900 = 5 x 3 x 2 : change 2 to 2
 3
 120 = 5 x 3 x 2 . Initially learners may write this as: 5 x 3 x 2 x 2 x 2
 2 2
 Page 77 300 = 5 x 3 x 2
 th 2 2 3
[4 Column: Clarification 900 = 5 x 3 x 2
 2
 Notes] HCF = 5 x 3 x 2 = 60 (Multiply the common prime factors of the three
 numbers)
 d) The factors of 140 are 1, 2, 5, 7, 10, 14, 28, 35, 70 and 140 Include 4 and 20 as factors of 140
 Page 89 Example b): values of p in the flow diagram Change ‘0’ to ‘1’
 th
[4 Column: Clarification
 Notes]
 Page 89 b) Describe the relationship between the numbers in the top row and d) Describe the relationship between the numbers in the top row and
 th
[4 Column: Clarification bottom row in the table. Then write down the value of and bottom row in the table. Then write down the value of m and n
 Notes]
 Page 98 The given example is misplaced. The given example belongs to 3.3 Geometry of straight lines and
 th
[4 Column: Clarification NOT to 3.2 Geometry of 2D shapes
 Notes]
 5.5 Change numbering from 5.5 to 5.2
 Represent
 Page 110 – 111
 nd
 Data
 [2 Column: TOPICS]
 5.6 Change numbering from 5.6 to 5.3
 Interpret,
 analyse and
 report data
 Page 117 In the Intermediate Phase and Grade 7 learners did probability In the Intermediate Phase and Grade 7 learners did probability
 th
[4 Column: Clarification experiments with coins, dice and spinners. In Grade 8 doing actual trials experiments with coins, dice and spinners. In Grade 8 doing actual
 Notes] of experiments become less important, and learners should consider trials of experiments become less important, and learners should
 probability for hypothetical events e.g. the probability of white as a consider probability for hypothetical events e.g. the probability of white
 successful outcome on a roulette table, or the probability of getting a as a successful outcome on a roulette table. , or the probability of
 Coca Cola at the shop if you know what the total number of drinks is that getting a Coca Cola at the shop if you know what the total number of
 they stock and how many cans of Coca Cola they have. drinks is that they stock and how many cans of Coca Cola they have.
 Page 133 Clarification notes – Example (c) 𝟐 3 1
 Change 𝑥= 𝟑 to 𝑥 = 2 or 𝑥 = 1 2
 th
[4 Column: Clarification 𝟑 2
 𝒙 = 𝟐 𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑎𝑑 𝑜𝑓 𝑥 = 3
 Notes]
 Page 140  For conversions, note:  For conversions, note:
  if 1cm = 10 cm, then 1 cm = 100 mm  if 1cm = 10 mm, then 1 cm = 100 mm
 2 2 2 2
 th
[4 Column: Clarification
  if 1 cm = 100 cm, then 1 m = 1 0 000 cm  if 1 m = 100 cm, then 1 m = 1 0 000 cm
 2 2 2 2

 Notes]
 Page 157 Knowledge - Description of skills to be demonstrated: Remove ‘Estimation and appropriate rounding off of numbers’ and
 [Table 4.2: Cognitive Bullet 1: Estimation and appropriate rounding off of numbers. place it under ‘Routine Procedures’
 levels] Table on Cognitive Levels – Routine Procedures Example 1  Change 85 to 35
 ........ if they have respectively  Put ‘and’ between 35 and 14 as follows: 25; 40; 21; 35 and 14 out
 of 50
 achieved 25; 40; 21; 85; 14 out of 50
 Problem solving, example 2: Problem solving, example 2:
 2. Mary travels a distance of km in 6 hours if she travels at an average 2. Mary travels a distance of 120km in 6 hours if she travels at an
 speed of 20 km/h on her bicycle. What should be her average speed if average speed of 20 km/h on her bicycle. What should be her average
 she wants to cover the same distance in 5 hours? [Grade 8] speed if she wants to cover the same distance in 5 hours? [Grade 8]
 2.3 NATURAL SCIENCES

PAGE NO. ERROR AMENDMENT

Page 11 ‘The Scientific Process’ numbered 15. Delete the number “15”

Page 17 The biosphere
 (Suggested Activities)
  (bullet 1) describing the components of Delete ‘s’ from biospheres
 Earth’s biospheres

Page 36 Ecosystems Replace statement with:
  all ecosystems combined make up form  “all ecosystems form part of the
 part of the biosphere biosphere”

Page 68 Applications
 • burning wood and fossil fuels releases Move entire text (1st bullet only) from
 carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide into page 68 to end of Page 66.
 the atmosphere. These combine with
 water in the atmosphere to produce
 acid rain

Page 68 Applications
 • limestone (CaCO3) is used in agriculture Move entire text (2nd bullet only) from
 to make soil less acidic page 68 to end of page 69.

Page 85 Section 4.1 Section 4.1
  (bullet 1) Enable the teacher to judge a Replace ‘learners’’ with ‘learner’s’
 learners’ progress in a reliable way

Page 87 Forms of assessment on page 87 are not Number forms of assessment on page
 numbered 87
 2.4 SOCIAL SCIENCES

The table on the overview of topics should start with the Intermediate Phase History topics
followed by the Senior Phase. The correct table is indicated below:

OVERVIEW OF TOPICS

SUMMARY: CONTENT OVERVIEW: HISTORY INTERMEDIATE PHASE
Term Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6
1 Local history Hunter-gatherers and An African kingdom long
 herders in southern ago in southern Africa:
 Africa Mapungubwe
2 Learning from leaders The first farmers in Explorers from Europe
 southern Africa find southern Africa
3 Transport through time An ancient African Democracy and
 society: Egypt citizenship in South
 Africa
4 Communication through A heritage trail through Medicine through time
 time the provinces of South
 Africa

SUMMARY: CONTENT OVERVIEW: HISTORY SENIOR PHASE
Term Grade 7 Grade 8 Grade 9
1 The kingdom of Mali and The Industrial Revolution World War II – The
 the city of Timbuktu in in Britain and southern causes and outbreak
 the 14th century Africa from 1860 (1919 – 1945)
2 The Transatlantic slave The Mineral Revolution in The Nuclear Age and the
 trade South Africa Cold War (1945 – 1990)
3 Colonisation of the Cape The scramble for Africa: Turning points in South
 in the 17th and 18th late 19th century African history 1948 and
 centuries 1950s
4 Co-operation and conflict World War I (1914-1918) Turning points in South
 on the frontiers of the African history 1960,
 Cape Colony in the early 1976 and 1994
 19th century

Page 50: The SBA in the Programme of Assessment is indicated as 60% in the grid,
instead of 40%. The correct information is indicated in the tables below:
 GRADE 7
Term 1 History Task
 Assessment (SBA)
 School -Based

 Geography Project
Term 2 History Task/test
 40%

 Geography Task/Test
Term 3 History Task
 Geography Task
 Term 4 History Examination Year-end
 Geography Examination examination
 60%

 GRADE 8
Term 1 History Task

 Assessment (SBA)
 School -Based
 Geography Task
Term 2 History Task/test

 40%
 Geography Task/Test
Term 3 History Task
 Geography Project
Term 4 History Examination Year-end
 Geography Examination examination
 60%

 GRADE 9
Term 1 History Task

 Assessment (SBA)
 School -Based
 Geography Task
Term 2 History Task/test

 40%
 Geography Task/Test
Term 3 History Project
 Geography Task
Term 4 History Examination Year-end
 Geography Examination examination
 60%