National Curriculum Statements (NCS)

 Curriculum and Assessment
 Policy Statement

 GRADE 12 CAPS
 AMENDMENTS
 ABRIDGED SECTION 4
 GRADE 12 CAPS

 AMENDMENTS

 Implementation Date:
 January 2021

 3
 Contents

SECTION A: ABRIDGED CAPS SECTION 4 AMENDMENTS
1. Introduction
2. Purpose
3. Conclusion

SECTION B: SUBJECT SPECIFIC AMENDMENTS
1. Accounting
2. Agricultural Management Practices
3. Agricultural Sciences
4. Agricultural Technology
5. Business Studies
6. Computer Applications Technology (CAT)
7. Civil Technology – Civil Services, Construction and Woodworking
8. Consumer Studies
9. Economics
10. Electrical Technology – Digital Electronics, Electronics and Power Systems
11. Engineering Graphics & Design (EGD)
12. First Additional Languages (FAL)
13. Geography
14. History
15. Home Languages
16. Hospitality Studies
17. Information Technology (IT)
18. Life Orientation
19. Life Sciences
20. Mathematical Literacy
21. Mathematics
22. Mechanical Technology – Automotive, Fitting and Machining & Welding and Metalwork
23. Physical Sciences
24. Religion Studies
25. Second Additional Languages
26. Technical Mathematics
27. Technical Sciences
28. Tourism

PLEASE NOTE: The Arts Subjects are published in a separate document.

 4
 5
 SECTION A: ABRIDGED CAPS SECTION 4 AMENDMENTS
1. Introduction
The National Curriculum Statement, Grades R-12 was approved as National Policy and published in the Government
Gazette 34600, Notices 722 and 723 of 12 September 2011.

The National Curriculum Statement, Grades R-12 comprises:
• The Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for all approved subjects for Grades R-12;
• The National Policy Pertaining to the Programme and Promotion Requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R-12; and
• The National Protocol for Assessment.

A number of concerns were received from teachers, subject specialists, parents and education stakeholders about the
challenges in the implementation of the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS) in many subjects
across the grades with regards to:
• curriculum/assessment overload and poor curriculum coverage;
• poor quality of formal assessment tasks;
• lack of guidance on the use of cognitive levels;
• omissions on the forms of assessment; and weighting of assessment with regards to time and marks;
• the need to create more time for teaching and formative assessment;
• the number of tasks based on the need to make valid and reliable judgments about learning outcomes;
• shift from disconnected ‘tagged on’ assessments to credible assessment tasks;
• the nature of the subject and Grade used to determine the required number of assessment tasks; and
• to reduce dominance by any single type or mode, e.g.: Tests, Projects, Assignments, Case Studies,
 Simulations etc.
• The Department of Basic Education has considered the concerns and has agreed to undertake a holistic review
 of the CAPS documents to enhance the effectiveness of the curriculum. However, a curriculum strengthening
 process is lengthy and includes strict policy processes. To urgently address the most pressing needs and provide
 interim relief to teachers whilst supporting effective curriculum implementation, transitional arrangements have
 been approved whilst allowing the rigorous process of strengthening the CAPS to take place.
The DBE developed an abridged version of Section 4 of the CAPS, focusing mainly on the reduction of formal
assessment tasks across most subjects.

2. Purpose
This document presents an abridged version of Section 4 of the CAPS document. It specifically provides the interim
changes made to the programme of assessment for subjects in Grades 12, for implementation in January 2021.

The changes were made to relieve teachers from the burden of overload regarding the number of assessment tasks,
thus, improving the focus on teaching and learning. The revisions in some subjects also include guidance regarding
cognitive demands and types of assessment. The reduction of tasks in the FET phase varies from subject to subject
based on the individual nature of the subject.

3. Conclusion
The amendments contained in this booklet must be read in conjunction with the relevant Curriculum and Assessment
Policy Statements for the identified subjects in the FET Band.

 6
 SECTION B: SUBJECT SPECIFIC AMENDMENTS

1. Accounting

Programme of Assessment Grades 12

The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
throughout a term. The requirements (number and nature of tasks) for Accounting are indicated below:
Grade 12 Programme of Assessment

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4

 Two papers Two papers
 2-hours each 2-hours each
Marks * 50 100 50 50
 2 x 150 = 300 2 x 150 = 300

 300 400

Term Reporting
 25 75 100 25 75

*Marks indicate the minimum mark per formal assessment task except examinations

4.4.1 ther forms of assessment

Various types of tasks are explained below. For those which involve independent work by learners in their own
time, teachers are advised to ensure that certain aspects are completed in class. Teacher supervision of these
aspects will tend to ensure that learners work independently and that their progress is monitored

 7
 Project

A project in each of the grades in the FET band is mandatory. Only one project per annum is recommended per
grade. When preparing a project, consider the following minimum requirements:
• Learners should be given the necessary guidance prior to commencement of the project and their progress
 must be monitored.
• All criteria used to assess the project must be discussed with the learners.
• Generally, projects are given a longer period of time to complete as they involve some form of research,
 consolidating and choosing relevant information and preparing a written document as evidence.
• Often projects can pertain to some form of problem; and
• Research may form part of the project - the project is the evidence of the research conducted.
• Accounting skills may be developed through a project by incorporating use of accounting software
 programmes.
A suggestion is that projects are dealt with towards the end of a particular term (e.g. first term) for submission
during the next term.

Presentation

Presentations can be written or oral, but there must be evidence of the presentation. All criteria used to assess the
presentation must be discussed with the learners prior to the commencement of the presentation. Where resources
are available, the use of electronic presentations should be encouraged.

Case Study
Learners are presented with a real-life situation, a problem or an incident related to the topic. They are expected
to assume a particular role in articulating the position. They would draw on their own experience, the experience
of peers or prior learning to interpret, analyse and solve a problem or problems.

Newspaper articles, magazine articles, and TV or radio presentations form excellent case studies. Learners have
to read and/or listen, digest the information and then make informed decisions. Questions can range from lower
order, e.g. direct quotes from the article, to higher order when they are asked to analyse comments or make
suggestions. Case studies are a very good way of keeping the subject up to date and relevant.

 8
 Report
A report is generally the written evidence of a survey, analysis or investigation. Generally, this will be shorter than
a project and it is specific to the topic, e.g. a business has come to you for advice on whether the business is
experiencing liquidity problems. Often it implies consulting with an expert for advice on some problem - therefore
it links very well with problem-solving. Tests

One test, written under controlled conditions, is prescribed for Grade 12. The test should adhere to the following:
• It must be completed by all classes in the same grade on the same day;
• All learners write the same test, which is completed under examination conditions;
• Questions must comply with year-end examination standards;
• Where there is more than one teacher, agreement must be reached on the scope, as well as the date and
 time
 of the test;
• The duration of the test should be one and half hours for 100 marks;
• The test should cover the different cognitive levels as in examinations. See table on cognitive levels below.

4.4.2 Examinations

The following guidelines should be considered when constructing examinations:
• Content
 Content stipulated specifically for the grade 80%
 Content stipulated in previous grades which impacts on assessment in subsequent grades 20%
• Cognitive levels: Refer to Bloom’s revised taxonomy: Remembering, Understanding, Applying, Analysing,
 Evaluating and Creating

 Basic thinking skills
 30%
 (e.g. factual recall, low-level comprehension and low-level application)

 Moderately high thinking skills
 40%
 (e.g. more advanced application, interpretation and low-level analysis)

 Higher-order thinking skills
 30%
 (e.g. advanced analytical skills, evaluation and creative problem-solving)
• Problem-solving
Approximately 10% to 15% of all examinations should address problem-solving questions using critical and
creative thinking. These include the solving of real-life problems within the context of the Accounting curriculum.

 9
 These problem-solving questions must also cover a range of cognitive skills (lower, middle and higher order) to
cater for all learners but within the context of the learners.

For example, ‘surface’ problem-solving questions might involve recall or comprehension skills on familiar
information while ‘deep’ problem-solving questions will generally involve creative solutions in new and unfamiliar
scenarios falling within the ambit of the Accounting curriculum.
While analysis involving financial indicators can form very interesting problem-solving questions, the topic of
problem solving goes a lot further and should be integrated into all aspects of the curriculum so that the learners
develop the skills to apply the knowledge acquired.

Guidelines for ‘deep’ problem-solving questions are:
- Learners identify problems from Accounting information provided.
- Learners quote the relevant information to support their opinions on the problems.
- Learners provide valid and appropriate solutions.

Mid-year examinations
The June examination has been cancelled.

Trial examination (Grade 12 only)

The trial examination is one of the six tasks of the Programme of Assessment for Grade 12. Ideally, the trial
examination should cover the full scope of the Grade 12 curriculum and should model the final Grade 12
examination. Below is an outline of the structure of the trial examination:

 Implementation date Paper Time Marks Topics

 Paper 1 2 hours 150 Discipline 1
 Grade 12 2020
 Paper 2 2 hours 150 Discipline 2
NB.: The two papers must be written on two separate days.

Final examination
Grades 12 should write two papers, each of 2-hours and 150 marks, as a final examination.

 *In proportion to time devoted to each topic

 Implementation date Paper Time Marks Topics*

 Paper 1 2 hours 150 Discipline 1
 Grade 12 2020
 Paper 2 2 hours 150 Discipline 2
NB.: The two papers must be written on two separate days.

 10
 Formula sheet for financial indicators
A formula sheet will be provided to learners. However, the titles will not be provided for each formula. Interpretation
of the indicators is of paramount importance. Teachers are advised to deter learners from adopting a rote-learning
approach to the indicators, and rather to encourage them to understand the purpose and rationale of each financial
indicator. This approach will enable learners to provide well-informed comments on the indicators in interpreting
the financial information.

 11
 2. Agricultural Management Practices
4.4 Programme of Assessment

The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
throughout a term.

4.4.2 de 12
Formal assessment: Grade 12 (Six Tasks)

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Certification Mark

(1) Assignment - 25% (3) Control test - (4) Trial examination 100% SBA
(2) Control test - 75% 100% Term1: 100
 Term 2: 100
 Term 3: 100
 Total SBA: 300÷12=25
 (5) PAT

 Management Overview: 20
 Practical Activities: 50
 Management Test: 20
 Time Register: 10
 Total PAT: 100÷4=25
 (6) External Examination:

 Total 200÷4=50

 100 100 100 Total certification Mark: 100

 Certification Mark for Grade 12

 SBA (25%) PAT (25 %) End-of-year assessment (50%)

 Term 1: 100 Practical assessment task: 100 End-of-year examination: 200

 Term 2: 100

 Term 3: 100

 100 100 200

 12
 • Internally set • Internally set • Externally set

 • Internally marked • Internally marked • Externally marked

 • Externally moderated • Externally moderated • Externally moderated

 • Recorded on SASAMS SBA mark • Recorded on SASAMS marksheet • Externally captured

 sheet provided by the provincial provided by the provincial • Recorded on SASAMS marksheet
 assessment body assessment body provided by the provincial assessment
 body

4.4.3 Assignments Tasks

Grade 10 to 12 each have a minimum of 1 assignment in term 1

Grade 12 Assignment

Assignments could be designed from the following content
• farm planning
• recording
• product harvesting
• marketing
• value adding
• processing
• Packing and distribution.

Grade 12 examinations

• The Grade 12 examination paper focuses on generic enterprises that are covered by all schools irrespective
 of their agro-ecological area.
• The trial examination should almost resemble the end-of-year examination in terms of the layout of the
 paper, the content that is covered and the questioning style. This paper should also be written in three hours
 with a mark allocation of 200 marks.
• The end-of-year examination is a written paper, which is set and moderated externally. It accounts for 50%
 of the marks for assessment. The external examination for Grade 12 should consist of one paper, which has
 a total of 200 marks. The duration of the paper should be three hours.

 13
 Duration of the Paper 3 hours

 Production Enterprise Shorter questions Longer questions Total Marks

 Section A 50 marks 50

 Section B (3 questions) 3 × 50 marks 150

 Total Marks 50 150 200

 14
 3. Agricultural Sciences

4.3 Formal Assessment

In Grade 12 the formal assessment constitutes 25% and is set and marked internally and moderated externally.
The remaining 75% of the final mark for certification in Grade 12 is set, marked and moderated externally.

 Formal assessment: Grade 12 (6 tasks)

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Certification mark

 Task based Task based Trial examination: SBA: Weighting
 assessment assessment 2: 100% 100% Task Based assessment:
 1: 25% Practical investigation: 15
 Control test: 75% Assignment: 15
 Test based assessment:
 Control test: 30
 Trial examination: 40
 Total: 100
 Examination: External
 Total: 300

 100 100 100 Total certification mark: 400

In Grade 12 four tasks are completed during the school year and make up 25% of the total marks for Agricultural
Sciences. In Grade 12 there are two external examination papers totalling 300 marks. Together these two papers
make up the remaining 75%.

 15
 4.3.1 Formal Assessment tasks

Programme of Assessment

The programme of assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout
a term.

4.4.1 Grade 12

 Programme of Assessment (Grade 12) External
 assessment

 Assessment Tasks (Cass) End-of-year
 assessment

 Percentage allocated 25% 75%

 Forms of assessment Practical Controlled test Trial November
 investigation and Examination examinations P1
 Assignment P1 & P2 & P2

 Number of pieces 2 1 1 1

 Marks 15 15 30 40 150 150

 Sub totals 100 300

 Grand total 400

Certification mark for Grade 12

 SBA (25%) End-of-year assessment (75%)

 100 300

 Internally set Externally set
 Internally marked Externally marked
 Externally moderated Externally moderated
 Written on computerized SBA mark sheet provided by the provincial assessment Externally capture
 body

 Total mark: 100 + 300 =400

4.4.3. Tests/Quarter-ending tests and Examinations
1. A test in the programme of assessment should not be made up of several smaller tests. Each test should
 cover a substantial amount of content and should be set for 60-90 minutes.

 16
 2. The marks should be 75-100 considering the volume of the content covered and the time available.
3. Each task, test and examination must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners. The
 following is used as a guide to compile tasks and examination questions encompassing the different
 cognitive levels:

 Cognitive Levels Percentage

 Knowledge 40

 Comprehension and Application 40

 Analysis, evaluation and synthesis 20

4.4.5 Examinations: End-of-year examination (format/structure)

Grade 12 (Trial Exam and End of the Year Exam Format)

 Paper: 1

 Duration 2.5 Hours

 Content Section: A Section B Total Marks

 • Animal Nutrition Question 1 Question 2 - 4 150
 • Animal Production,
 45 Animal Nutrition: (35 Marks)
 • Protection and Control
 Animal Production, Protection and Control: (35 Marks)
 • Reproduction
 Reproduction: (35 Mark)

 Paper: 2

 Duration 2.5 Hours

 Content Section: A Section B Total Marks

 • Agricultural Management Question 1 Question 2 - 4
 and Marketing
 45 Agricultural Management and Marketing: (35 Marks)
 • Production factors
 Production factors: (35 Marks
 • Basic Agricultural Genetics
 Basic Agricultural Genetics: (35 Marks)
 150

 Grade 12-A comprehensive practical investigation on animal nutrition, selection and identification of feeds and
 calculations in Pearson Square, nutritive value and interpretation of the various values

 17
 4. Agricultural Technology
4.4.1 Assessment in Grade 12
Programme of Assessment in Grade 12

 Formal Assessment: Grade 12 (Six tasks)

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Certification Mark

 1. Research task - 25% 3. Control test 2 - 100% 4. Trial examination - 100% SBA: Internal
 2. Control test 1 - 75% Term 1 – 100
 Term 2 – 100
 Term 3 – 100 Total
 300/12=25%
 5.PAT:
 Design – 25
 Construction process – 50
 Final product – 25 Total
 100/4=25%
 6. Final Examination: External
 Total 200/4=50%

 100 100 100 Total Certification Mark:100%

 Certification Mark for Grade 12

 SBA (25%) PAT (25%) Final examination (50%)

 Term 1 – 100 Practical assessment task PAT - 100 End of year examination - 200
 Term 2 – 100
 Term 3 – 100

 100 100 200

 • Internally set • Internally set • Externally set
 • Internally assessed • Internally assessed • Externally assessed
 • Externally moderated • Externally moderated • Externally moderated
 • Written on computerized SBA mark • Written on computerized PAT mark • Externally captured
 sheet provided by the provincial sheet provided by the provincial
 assessment body assessment body

 Total mark: 100 + 100 +200 = 400/4=100%
Examples of Assessment Tasks in Agricultural Technology

 18
 Control Tests
The formal tests in Agricultural Technology must be substantive in terms of time and marks. Tests should include
the theory of the technological process, principles and concepts and the application thereof in the production of
product(s)/artefact(s).

Research task
This task should be based on activities such as research, case study, projects, simulations, modelling, fabrication,
manufacturing and demonstration and should focus on a variety of technological themes relating to an agricultural
context. Tasks such as simulations put theoretical knowledge to practical use and usually do not require
conclusions. Therefore, simulations will not include elaborate worksheets and conclusions but should rather
generate guidelines and criteria to what is required.

Examples of research tasks:
Grade 12
• do research on the maintenance of an electric fence; set up a small-scale solar
 panel system on the farm; and
• do research on a centre pivot irrigation system?

Examination
The trial examinations for Grade 12 should consist of one paper of six questions and will count 200 marks. The
suggested duration of the paper is 3 hours. All the questions are compulsory.
The trial examination needs to be closely related to the final examination in terms of time allocation, layout of the
paper and subject requirements.

External assessment in Grade 12
The external assessment task in Grade 12 consists of an externally written paper (50%) and a PAT (25%).

External Examination
The external examination for Grade 12 will consist of one paper that contains six questions and counts 200 marks.
The duration of the paper will be 3 hours. All the questions are compulsory.

 19
 The examination papers should test the knowledge and skills covered in Agricultural Technology.

 Examination Guidelines for Agricultural Technology

 General remarks

 These guidelines are applicable to Grade 12 in Agricultural Technology.

 Specifications

 One paper

 Grade 12

 Trial Examination

 Duration 3 hours

 Marks 200

 • all the questions have to be answered;
 • sketches must be neat;
 • all calculations and units must be indicated; and
 • the questions will not necessarily count for the same marks, as each section of the work has a different weighting.

 Questions Concepts Covered Marks

 Q1 Multiple-choice (20), Change the UNDERLINED word (10) and Choose a word/term from 40
 COLUMN B that matches the description in COLUMN A (10). These questions can cover all
 content areas.

 Q2 Structural materials and related drawings, measurements and safety 35

 Q3 Electrical energy and related tools, materials and safety 20

 Q4 Skills and construction processes and related tools, materials, drawings, measurements and 35
 safety

 Q5 Tools, implements and equipment and related tools, materials, drawings, calibrations and 40
 safety

 Q6 Irrigation and water supply. Related tools, materials, drawings and measurements and 30
 communication

 200

 20
 The PAT for Agricultural Technology

The PAT comprises of a design component, and a manufacturing component. PAT leads to the design and
development of the product according to the technological processes. The task should have functional value and
must be based on real-life situations, for example the building of a braai, workbench, neck clamp, or drinking trough
for animals, etc. The learners should be familiarised with the assessment criteria before they start with the task.

The PAT in Grade 12 is internally set and assessed but externally moderated. The project is completed under
controlled conditions in the school workshop and is assessed by means of a rubric.
The PAT counts 25% of the total promotion mark (400).

The PAT counts 100 marks. It focuses on the development of the design portfolio (25 marks), the manufacturing
processes (50 marks) and the final product (25 marks). School/learners can choose their own projects keeping in
mind the prescribed criteria for the manufacturing process and the criteria and format for assessing the design
portfolio, processes during the manufacturing of the project and the final product.

Criteria for the Grade 12 PAT project

At least seven of the following techniques/skills must appear in the manufacturing of the final PAT product.
• at least one welding technique. (arc welding, oxy-acetylene welding or MIG welding);
• oxy acetylene cutting;
• soldering;
• measuring;
• Electro plating;
• drilling;
• sawing;
• filing;
• grinding;
• finishing off; and
• painting.

 21
 The format of the portfolio must be as follows:

 Cover page Learner name

 School

 Examination number

 Year

 Index Assignment

 Planning/research

 Design sketches

 Material list

 Cost calculations

 Source list

 Any additional information

 Project: You must build a pump house for a newly bought greenhouse Task:
 • Determine the actual location.
 • Draw up a site plan.
 • Draw a building plan.
 • Determine a quantity list.
 • Do a cost calculation of all materials that are needed?
 • Build the pump house. Total [100]

 Project: You must erect an electric fence around the farmyard Task:
 • Draw a site plan.
 • Do a cost calculation of all materials that are needed?
 • Safety measures.
 • Erecting of the fence. Total [100]

 22
 5. Business Studies

4.4 Programme of Assessment Grade 12
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
throughout a term. The requirements (number and nature of tasks) for Business Studies are indicated below

 GRADE 12

 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3

 Form of Case study Controlled Test Presentation Project Preparatory
 assessment examination

 Tool(s) of Marking guideline Marking guideline Rubric and Rubric and Marking guideline
 assessment Marking guideline Marking
 guideline

 Total marks 50 100 50 50 300

 Time 2 Hrs 1.5Hr 1Hr 6 Weeks 2 x 2 Hrs
 allocation

 Date of Week 8 Week 10 Week 6 Week 2 Week 9 - 11
 completion

 Content A minimum of 4 Control test At least 4 topics Term 3 topics as The preparatory
 focus: topics should be should cover all should be covered per the ATP exam should cover
 Knowledge covered as topics as as all topics
 and skills per the ATP for per the ATP for per the ATP for done for the
 Term 1 Term 1 Term 2 year as per the
 ATP

 23
 Weighting of formal assessment in Grade 12

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4

 Assessment

 Paper 1 Paper 2 Paper Paper 2
 1

 Total marks 50 100 50
 150 150 150 150
 50
 Term
 25 75 100 25 75
 Reporting

 300 400

 Final Mark 25 75 100

4.4.1 Forms of assessment

In Business Studies, the following forms of assessment must be administered:

o Case study of Presentation of Project of Controlled Test of Preparatory examinations

 Terms of references for all tasks:
o The Programme of Assessment informs the type of assessment per term expected from learners of Each
 formal assessment task must consist of only one assessment activity of Each task must be completed by
 individual learners. (Group work is not allowed as it influences mark allocations as well and result in skewed
 SBA marks)
o A topic must be specified and clear instructions given to learners as guidance of what is expected when
 completing the task
o Questions must scaffold from lower cognitive levels to higher cognitive level questions where they are asked
 to analyse, comment and possibly make suggestions based on the topic and the case study given.
o The case study, presentation and project must be administered under controlled conditions. Learners must
 collect information and bring it to the classroom where the teacher and learners can interact with the
 collected information to complete the task

 24
 Case study
o Teachers must provide learners with the topics on which the case study will be based for assessment o
 Learners must be allowed one week to collect resources on the topics. The case study must be
 administered and completed within two hours under controlled conditions of Case studies are a very good
 way of keeping the subject up to date and relevant o Learners are presented with a real-life situation,
 a problem or an incident related to the topic Each formal assessment task must consist of only one
 assessment activity o They should draw on their own experiences or prior learning to interpret, analyse and
 solve a problem or set of problems and make suggestion/s and or recommendation/s to defend their
 arguments.
o Case studies may be taken from newspaper articles, magazine articles, video clips or radio recordings and
 all sources must be acknowledged.

Controlled Test

Only One controlled test is prescribed in Grade 12 and must be administered in Term 1. The controlled tests must
adhere to the following: o It must be completed by all classes in the same grade on the same day.
 Where there is more than one teacher, agreement must be reached on the scope as well as the date and
 time of the tests.
 All learners write the same test under examination conditions. The duration of the test must be one and a
 half hours for 100 marks.
 The test must cover the different cognitive levels in examinations. See table on cognitive levels under
 Examinations in the following section.
 The test must also include problem-solving questions.
 The test must cover a range of integrated topics, as determined by the annual teaching plan work schedule
 and the assessment plan.
 Questions must comply with year-end examination standards.

Presentation
A presentation in Business Studies consists of the following components:
• Written (40) marks
• Oral (10) marks
• Total (50) marks

 25
 The presentation must be based on topics covered in term 2 according to the Annual Teaching Plan. A maximum
of five (5) minutes must be allocated for the oral presentation per learner. A separate rubric must be used for both
the written and oral part of the presentation.
The rubric for the written presentation must be accompanied by a marking guideline. Evidence must be available
of the oral mark allocated using a rubric.
The rubric for the assessment of the written as well as for the oral part of the presentation must include the following
aspects:
• Criteria used to assess must be discussed with the learners prior to the commencement of the project.
• Clear level descriptors, which represents the contents of the topic identified for assessment through
specific criteria, must be used. (All levels from 0 – 5 must be included)
• No clustering of levels is permitted, e.g. 0-1; 2-3 and 4-5
• The depth of responses must be clear to allow a learner to obtain maximum marks.
• Technical aspects required must also be set as criteria and to be clearly defined in the level descriptors.
Descriptors should be clearly developed in both rubrics.
Where e-learning resources are available, the use of electronic presentations should be encouraged and where e-
learning resources are not available, posters and/or handout presentations are encouraged.

Project
The purpose of a research project is to develop the research, critical thinking and problem-solving skills.
Projects generally work well if they are structured around some form of problem and learners guided towards
further research.
Research will form part of the project – the project is the evidence of the research conducted.
Projects must be given to learners towards the end of the second term to conduct research and must be
administered during the second week of the third term. Refer to the note at the end of Term 2 Content (page 40
for Grade 12) o A project is completed over a longer period of time, as they involve some form of research,
consolidation and the choosing of relevant information to prepare a written document as evidence.

The control in the case of a project will be in the form of continuous monitoring of progress.
All the criteria used in a rubric to assess the project must be discussed with the learners prior to them commencing
with the project. A marking rubric must be used for the project and the following aspects are of importance:

• Criteria used to assess must be discussed with the learners prior to the commencement of the project.
• Clear level descriptors, which represents the contents of the topic identified for assessment through specific
 criteria, must be used. (All levels from 0 – 5 must be included)

 26
 • No clustering of levels is permitted, e.g. 0-1; 2-3 and 4-5
• The depth of responses must be clear to allow a learner to obtain maximum marks.
• Technical aspects required must also be set as criteria and to be clearly defined in the level descriptors.

4.4.2 Examinations
The following guidelines should be considered when constructing examinations:
Content

 Content stipulated specifically for the grade 100%

Cognitive levels

 Basic thinking skills (e.g. factual recall, low-level application and low-level comprehension) 30%

Moderately high thinking skills (e.g. more advanced application, interpretation and low-level analysis) 50%

Higher-order thinking skills (e.g. advanced analytical skills, synthesis and evaluation) 20%

Problem solving
Approximately 10% of all examinations should address problem-solving questions using critical and creative
thinking.
These include the solving of real-life problems within the context of the Business Studies curriculum.
These problem-solving questions must also cover a range of cognitive skills (lower, middle and higher order) to
cater for all learners, but within the context of the learners.
Mid-year examinations
The June examination has been cancelled.

Preparatory examination
A preparatory examination is one of the six tasks of the Programme of Assessment for Grade 12. Ideally, the
preparatory examination should cover the full scope of the Grade 12 curriculum and should model the final Grade
12 NSC examination. Below is an outline of the structure of the preparatory examination:

 Paper Time Marks Content

 Business Environment and Business
 1 2 Hrs 150
 Grade 12 Operation

 2 2 Hrs 150 Business Venture and Business Role

 27
 End-of-year examinations

Grade 12 must have two question papers consisting of 150 marks EACH and the duration must be 2 hours per
paper.

 Business Business Business Business
 Paper Time Marks Environment Venture Role Operation

 1 2 Hrs 150 50% 50%
 Grade 10-12
 2 Hrs 150 50% 50%

 28
 6. Computer Application Technology (CAT)

Grade 12
 Term Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4
 Task External Examination
 Task Task 1 Task 3 Task 4
 2
 Form / Types of Theory Pract Alternativ Practic Theory SBA Practical Theory Practical
 Assessment Test ical e Task: al Exam Exam Exam Assessment
 Test Closed or Exam Task (Pat)
 Open
 Book or
 Case
 Study or
 Survey
 Total Marks Min 50 Min Min 50 150 150 Min 150 150 150
 50 750
 Report Mark 50% 50% 100% 50% 50% 25% 25% 25% 25%
 Weighting
 SBA 17,5% 17,5% 15% 25% 25% 100%
 Weightings
 Time Allocation 45 - 60 45 - 45 - 60 3 3 Hours Term 3 Hours 3 Term 1 – 3
 Minute 60 Minutes Hours 1–3 Hours
 s Minut
 es

There will be no June examination in Term 2.
Alternative types of assessment
An alternative type of assessment for CAT is a survey and a case study. A survey or a case study is optional
assessment to a test (Task 3 Term 2).
Survey
The survey will assess skills and knowledge acquired for the section Information Management. It will also twin as
preparation for the relevant section in the Practical Assessment Task.

 29
 The survey has two sections to this assessment task:

 Section 1
Creating a questionnaire to gather responses from an indicated number of respondents to a given scenario. The
findings of the survey will be presented to a target audience indicated in the instructions. This section of the task
should be done under controlled conditions. At the end of the duration the questionnaire must be handed
in/submitted for marking.

 Section 2
Presenting the questionnaire to respondents for completing. The responses must then be processed in a
spreadsheet according to the instructions given. Findings of survey will be submitted together with the completed
questionnaires. Section 2 to be handed in at a date stipulated in the instructions of the task.
The survey can also be presented as an integrated task (practical and theory) in which some questions/instructions
will assess the theory aspects of Information Management. Skills and knowledge assessed must accommodate
the required cognitive levels.

Case study
Case studies are in-depth investigations of real-life situation. Data is gathered from a variety of sources and by
using several different methods. A case study is a research method involving an in-depth, and detailed examination
of a scenario, as well as its related contextual conditions. The duration of a case study should be 45 to 60 minutes.
Structure of Papers

Paper 1: One 3-hour practical paper of 150 marks (25% of the total marks for the subject)
This will be a practically oriented paper covering questions on Solution Development. To successfully complete
this paper, each learner must have access to his or her own computer in the exam room. Provision needs to be
made for sufficient computers to enable the examination to be completed in a maximum of two sittings.

This paper assesses the practical skills pertaining to Solution Development, that is the application packages
studied, namely word processing, spreadsheets and databases as well as creating a simple web page using HTML.
These skills will be assessed in an integrated manner based on real-life scenarios. Problem solving and aspects
of file management will form part of the assessment of the application questions in this paper.

 30
 The paper will comprise of questions based on a scenario and will cover the following content areas in an integrated
manner:
  Word processing (± 45 marks)
  Spreadsheets (± 40 marks)
  Databases (± 35 marks)
  Web development (± 15 marks)
  General (integration and application of techniques, knowledge and procedural skills to new situations) (±
 15 marks)

 An Input Mask Character sheet will be provided for use with the question on Databases.
 An information sheet with HTML tags will be provided for use with the question on web development.
 The learner/candidate will not be required to enter large amounts of data. The required data could be retrieved
 from the data disk or imported from documents such as a text file, word processing document, a database
 table or a spreadsheet.

 Paper 2: One 3-hour written paper of 150 marks (25% of the total marks for the subject)
 The paper will cover all theory aspects of all topics, including Information Management and elements
 (conceptual knowledge) of Solution Development (viz. application packages and file management)
 A section will also assess the understanding of the technologies studied to make informed decisions in a real-
 life end-user scenario, ranging from choices of computer technology to its responsible use.

The table below gives a breakdown of the structure of the question paper:
 Section Description

 A Question 1 – 3: Short questions (± 25 marks)
 A range of short questions covering all topics that could include:
  Multiple choice,
  Modified true and false, and
  Matching columns.

 B Question 4: Systems Technologies (± 25 marks)
 Questions related to the content, concepts and skills in the systems technologies topic area.

 31
 Question 5: Internet and Network Technologies (± 15 marks)
 Questions related to the content, concepts and skills in the Internet and WWW, e-communication and
 network technology topic areas.

 Question 6: Information Management (± 10 marks)
 Questions related to the management of information.

 Question 7: Social Implications (± 10 marks)
 Questions are focused on the content, concepts and skills in the social implications focus area, namely
 impact of ICTs on society and health, social, legal, ethical, security and environmental issues.

 Question 8: Solution development (± 15 marks)
 Questions focused on the solution development topic area, namely the knowledge and understanding that
 supports the practical application of skills.

 C Question 9: Integrated Scenario (± 25 marks)
 This question is based on a single scenario and will be aligned to all the topics. It will also assess the
 understanding of these technologies to make informed decisions in a real-life end-user scenario, ranging
 from choices of technology to its responsible use.

 Question 10: Integrated Scenario/Case Study (± 25 marks)
 This question is based on a single scenario/case study and could be aligned to all the topics. It will also
 assess the understanding of these technologies to make informed decisions in a real-life end-user scenario,
 ranging from choices of technology to its responsible use.

Content to be covered
Assessment addresses the content as set out in this document. Due to the conceptual progression of the content
across the grades, content and skills from Grade 10 – 12 will be assessed in the external papers at the end of
Grade 12.

New and emerging technologies will be accommodated in the curriculum as the curriculum is reviewed.
Cognitive Demand and Levels of Difficulty
Papers are evaluated in terms of cognitive demand and level of difficulty

 32
 Levels of cognitive demand:
Levels of cognitive demand are categorised as follows:
 Level Taxonomy Description
 Recall of factual/process knowledge in isolation, i.e. one step/set of basic
 C1 (level 1) Knowledge,
 steps/instruction/process at a time, e.g. definitions in the theory section and
 30% Remembering
 single action or procedure found in the application packages.
 Combining isolatable bits or demonstrates understanding of steps/processes/
 isolatable bits, such as translating from one form of representation to another,
 e.g. translating pictures, symbols, diagrams, screenshots, ‘words’/mathematical
 C2 (level 2) Understanding, equations into e.g. spreadsheet formulas. These questions could include
 40% Applying reproduction of aspects of documents.
 It also requires using a combination of known routines/steps/processes in a
 familiar context in order to complete a task, where all of the information
 required is immediately available to the learner.
 Requires reasoning/investigation/developing a plan or combining different
 sets of steps/procedures; has some complexity where candidates need to see
 how parts relate to a whole and completing a task could have more than one
 possible approach.
 Analysing,
 It could also require weighing possibilities, deciding on most appropriate solution
 C3 (level 3) Evaluating,
 and testing to locate errors/ troubleshooting as well as pattern recognition and
 30% Creating
 generalisation.
 (Problem-solving)
 These questions will comprise actions/strategies/ procedures where candidates
 are required to create their own solutions to challenges different to those
 learners may have encountered in the classroom. These questions could include
 analysing documents or data, and decision-making.

Levels of difficulty
Levels of difficulty are categorised as follows:
D1: Easy for the average Grade 12 candidate to answer
D2: Moderately challenging for the average Grade 12 candidate to answer
D3: Difficult for the average Grade 12 candidate to answer
D4: Very difficult for the average Grade 12 candidate to answer. The skills and knowledge required to answer the
 questions at this level allow for an A-grade candidate (extremely high-achieving/ability learner) to be
 discriminated from other high ability/proficiency candidates.

 33
 In judging the level of difficulty of each question, both the demands that each question makes on the cognitive
ability of an average Grade 12 CAT learner and the intrinsic difficulty of the question or task is considered. In
making this judgement, the difficulty or ease of a particular question is identified. A four-category framework for
thinking about question or item difficulty adapted from Leong (2006) has been used in this identification
process.

This framework comprises the following four general categories of difficulty:
 Content difficulty: this indexes the difficulty of the subject matter, topic or conceptual knowledge; some
 content is inherently more difficult than other content.
 Stimulus difficulty: this relates to the linguistic features of the question and the challenge that candidates
 face in reading, interpreting and understanding the question.
 Task difficulty: this refers to the difficulty that candidates face when trying to formulate or produce an answer.
 Expected response difficulty: this refers to difficulties because of the mark scheme or memorandum, in
 other words how marks are allocated.

The estimated percentages for each level of difficulty within each cognitive level are shown in the table
below:

 D1 D2 D3 D4 TOTAL

 C1 ±10% ±10% ±10% - ±30%

 C2 ±10% ±15% ±13% ±2% ±40%

 C3 ±10% ±10% ±7% ±3% ±30%

 TOTAL ±30% ±35% ±30% ±5% 100%

 34
 7. Civil Technology – Civil Services, Construction and Woodworking

 The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
 throughout a term. Without this programme, assignments and tasks are crowded into the last few weeks of the
 term creating unfair pressure on the learners

 PROGRAMME OF
 ASSESSMENT

 School–based Assessment Practical Assessment Task Final Examination
 SBA PAT

 25% 25% 50%

 The table below shows the compilation of the school based assessment mark:

 Description Time Frame Marks

 Assignment Term1 50

 PAT Simulation Term2 200

 Preparatory examination Term3 200

 Total 450

The following is the Programme of Assessment for Grades 12.

 GRADE 12 ASSESSMENT
 REQUIREMENTS

 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4 % OF FINAL MARK
 ASSESSMENT TASKS
 PROMOTION MARK Weighting

 Assignment 1 5

 PAT Simulation 1 25

 preparatory examination 1 20

 Practical Assessment Task
 25
 (PAT)

 Final examination 1 50

 TOTAL – PROMOTION MARK

 35
 Compilation of the Civil Technology PAT Grades 12 mark is detailed in the table below:
 Description Time Frame Marks

 Simulation 1 January – March 50

 Simulation 2 April – June 50

 (Project)Final Product January – September 150

 Total 250

Two simulations and one project are prescribed. The simulations must be completed in term1 and term 2. Although
the final PAT (project/) product only needs to be completed in the third term, learners should start working on the
project from the first term in order to avoid running out of time to complete the PAT.

 7.1.1 Assignment
 • An assignment must be in the form of a written work which may include the following; Research, Case study,
 Drawings and Calculations.
 • It should cover term1 content and the duration should be 60 minutes.
 • The mark allocation should be 50 marks
 • Each Assignment must cater for a range of cognitive levels or skills.
 • The forms of Assessment used should be Grade and development level appropriate.
 • The design of these tasks should cover the content and context

 7.1.2 Examinations
 • Each examination must cater for a range of cognitive levels
 • There is no June Examination in Civil Technology specialisations
 • A Formal Prescribed Simulation will be Assessed in June.
 • The mark allocation of the three –hour Preparatory examination is 200 marks
 • The Preparatory examination papers is set by the teacher and must be moderated by head of department
 at the school and approved by the District Curriculum advisors / facilitator. This is done to ensure that the
 prescribed weightings are adhered to by the teacher.
 • The mark allocation of the externally three –hour final examination is 200 marks
 • In the Grade 12 examination only Grade 12 content will be assessed. However, prior knowledge from
 Grades
 10 – 11 may be necessary to interpret and answer some other questions
 7.2 Formal assessments should cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners as shown
 below for all Civil Technology Specialisations:

 Cognitive Levels Percentage of Task
 Lower order: knowledge 30%
 Middle order: comprehension and application 50%
 Higher order: analysis, evaluation and synthesis 20%

 36
 7.3 Examination Weighting in Civil Technology (Construction)
 Question Content/Topic Percentage

 1 OHSA, Materials, Tools, Equipment And Joining (Generic) 30%

 2 Graphics As Method of Communication (Generic) 40%

 3 Roofs, Staircases and Joining (Specific) 40%

 4 Excavations, Formwork, Tools And Equipment and Materials 30%
 (Specific)
 5 Plaster and Screed, Brickwork and Graphics as Means of 30%
 Communication (Specific)
 6 Reinforcement in Concrete, Foundations, Concrete Floor and 30%
 Quantities (Specific)
 TOTAL 100%

7.4 Grade 10 format of the Question paper in Civil Technology (Construction)

 QUESTION CONTENT MARKS PER TOPIC (VARIANCE ± 2 MARKS) MARKS PER QUESTION

 GENERIC
 1 OHS safety 30 30
 Materials 20
 2 40
 Tools & Equipment 20

 3 Graphics as means of communication 40 40

 Quantities 10
 4 30
 Joining 20
 SPECIFIC
 OHS safety 4
 Materials 6
 5 30
 Tools & Equipment 10
 Foundations 10
 Formwork 4

 Concrete and Brickwork 10
 6 Graphics as means of communication 8 30

 Quantities 6
 Joining 2
 GRAND TOTAL 200

 37
 7.4 Grade 11 format of the Question paper in Civil Technology (Construction)
 MARKS PER TOPIC
 MARKS PER
 QUESTION CONTENT (VARIANCE
 QUESTION
 ± 2 MARKS)
GENERIC
 OHS safety 10
1 30
 Materials 20
 Tools & Equipment 15
2 40
 Graphics as means of communication 25
 Quantities 20
3 30
 Joining 10
SPECIFIC
 Materials 8
 Excavations 8
4 30
 Foundations 4
 Concrete 10
 Tools & Equipment 4
 Graphics 8
5 Construction steel 4 30
 Formwork 8 (10)
 Cavity walls 6 (4)
 Joining 6
 Quantities 14
6 Construction brickwork 8 40
 Roof covering 8
 Staircases 4

GRAND TOTAL 200

 38
 7.5 Examination Weighting in Civil Technology (Woodworking)
 Question Content/Topic Percentage
 1 OHSA, Materials, Tools, Equipment And Joining (Generic) 30%
 2 Graphics As Method of Communication (Generic) 40%
 3 Casements, Cupboards, Wall-Panelling and Quantities (Specific) 40%
 4 Roofs, Ceilings, Tools and Equipment, and Materials (Specific) 30%
 5 Cantering, Formwork, Shoring and Graphics as Means of 30%
 Communication (Specific)
 6 Suspended Floors, Staircases, Ironmongery, Doors and Joining 30%
 (Specific)
 TOTAL 100%

 7.6 Grade 10 format of the Question paper in Civil Technology (Woodworking)
QUESTION CONTENT MARKS PER TOPIC (VARIANCE ± 2 MARKS) MARKS PER QUESTION

GENERIC
1 OHS safety 30 30
 Materials 20
2 40
 Tools & Equipment 20
 Graphics as means of
3 40 40
 communication
 Quantities 10
4 30
 Joining 20
SPECIFIC
 OHS safety 5
 Materials 7
5 30
 Tools & Equipment 6
 Casement 12
 Joining 4
 Quantities 8
6 30
 Graphics 8
 Doors 10
GRAND TOTAL 200

 39
 7.7 Grade 11 format of the Question paper in Civil Technology (Woodworking)

 MARKS PER TOPIC
 MARKS PER
QUESTION CONTENT (VARIANCE
 QUESTION
 ± 2 MARKS)

GENERIC
 OHS safety 15
1 35
 Materials 20
 Tools & Equipment 25
2 50
 Graphics as means of communication 25

 Quantities (Content was removed) 5
3 15
 Joining 10
 SPECIFIC
 Centering 6
 Formwork 10
4 30
 Shoring 6
 Materials 8
 Tools & Equipment 6
 Graphics 8
5 Staircase 4 30
 Suspended floor 6
 Casement 6
 Joining 6
 Quantities 10
 Doors 8
6 40
 Ceilings 4

 Wall panelling and Cupboards 8

 Ironmongery 4
GRAND TOTAL 200

 40
 7.8 Examination Weighting in Civil Technology (Civil Services)
 Question Content/Topic Percentage
 1 OHSA, Materials, Tools, Equipment And Joining (Generic) 30%
 2 Graphics As Method of Communication (Generic) 40%
 3 Construction Associated with Civil Services, OHSA and Quantities (Specific) 30%
 4 Cold and Hot-Water Supply, Tools, Equipment and Materials (Specific) 30%
 5 Graphics as Means of Communication, Roof Work and Storm Water (Specific) 30%
 6 Sewerage, Sanitary Fittings and Joining (Specific) 40%
 TOTAL 100%

 7.9 Grade 10 format of the Question paper in Civil Technology (Civil Services)
 MARKS PER TOPIC (VARIANCE MARKS PER
QUESTION CONTENT
 ± 2 MARKS) QUESTION
GENERIC
 OHS safety 10
1 30
 Materials 20
 Tools & Equipment 15
2 40
 Graphics as means of communication 25
 Quantities 20
3 30
 Joining 10
SPECIFIC
 OHS safety 4
 Materials 4

4 Construction associated with civil services 6 30
 Cold water supply 8
 Hot water supply 8
 Tools & Equipment 6

 Graphics as means of communication 16
5 30
 Roof work 6
 Storm water 2
 Joining 6
6 40
 Quantities 6

 41
 Above /below ground drainage (sewerage) 18
 Sanitary fitments 10
GRAND TOTAL 200

 7.10 Grade 11 format of the Question paper in Civil Technology (Civil Services)

 MARKS PER TOPIC (VARIANCE
QUESTION CONTENT MARKS PER QUESTION
 ± 2 MARKS)

GENERIC
 OHS safety 10
1 30
 Materials 20
 Tools & Equipment 15
2 40
 Graphics as means of communication 25
 Quantities 20
3 30
 Joining 10
SPECIFIC
 OHS safety 4
 Materials 4
 Construction associated with civil
4 6 30
 services
 Cold water supply 8
 Hot water supply 8
 Tools & Equipment 6
 Graphics as means of communication 16
5 30
 Roof work 6
 Storm water 2
 Joining 6
 Quantities 6
6 Above /below ground drainage 40
 18
 (sewerage)
 Sanitary fitments 10
GRAND TOTAL 200

 42
 8. Consumer Studies

4.3 Formal Assessment

4.3.1 The formal assessment requirements for Consumer Studies in Grade 12

 • Two formal theoretical assessment tasks must be completed during the school year in Grade 12.
 • The two formal theoretical assessment tasks and two practical lesson tasks, consisting of six
 weekly practical lessons in Grade 12, make-up the 25% of the total School based Assessment (SBA)
 mark for Consumer Studies.
 • The end-of-year assessment includes two parts: (1) A Practical Assessment Task (PAT) and (2) a
 written theory paper. Together these two parts make up the remaining 75% in all Grade 12.
 • Together, the three components constitute the end-of-year promotion mark of a 100%.
 • The Grade 12 PAT tests are developed and set by the teacher according to the criteria stipulated in the
 PAT document for the current year.
 • Assessment for the PAT is assessed internally by the teacher and externally by the Subject Advisor /
 Provincial Subject Head.
 • The end-of-year NSC assessment (75%) in Grade 12 is externally set, marked and moderated.
 • Each task must cater for a balanced range of cognitive levels as well as align to the prescribed range
 for levels of difficulty as reflected in the tables that follow.
 • An item and error analysis of learner performance must be completed after marking a formal
 assessment task. The purpose of the analysis is to expose a lack of knowledge and understanding or
 poorly developed skills. It further assists to identify the most suitable intervention strategy to improve the
 level of knowledge and understanding to improve learner performance.
 • This process is verified externally by DBE/UMALUSI.

Formal assessment must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners. The cognitive demand in
assessment should be appropriate for the age and developmental level of the learner. Assessment in Consumer
Studies must cater for a range of cognitive levels and learner abilities.

 43
 The assessment tasks should be designed carefully to cover the content in the subject as well as the range of skills
and cognitive levels, identified in the specific aims in Section 1 of the Consumer Studies CAPS Policy Document.

 SUGGESTED WEIGHTING FOR COGNITIVE LEVELS

 Cognitive level Percentage

 Lower order:
 30 %
 Remembering

 Middle order:
 Understanding 20% 50%
 Applying 30%

 Higher order: Analysing / Evaluating and Creating 20%

The design of assessments should ensure that a full range of content and skills are assessed within each grade.
The specific aims, topics, content and range of skills in the subject should be used to inform the planning and
development of assessment tasks.

Formal assessment must cater for a range of levels of difficulty, as shown below:

 SUGGESTED WEIGHTING FOR LEVELS OF DIFFICULTY

 Levels of Difficulty Percentage

 Easy 30%

 Moderate 50%

 Difficult 20%

Examiners and moderators in all subjects are encouraged to think about the difficulty level of every question /skill
selected for assessment. In judging the level of difficulty, the demand made on the cognitive ability of an average
learner as well as the intrinsic difficulty of the question or task is considered.

In making this judgement, the difficulty or ease of a particular question is identified. A four-category framework for
thinking about question or item difficulty adapted from Leong (2006) is used in this identification process.

 44
 This framework comprises the following four general sources of difficulty:
• Content difficulty: Classifies the difficulty of the subject matter, topic or conceptual knowledge of the
 content, where some content is inherently more difficult than other content.
• Stimulus difficulty: Relates to the linguistic features of the question and the challenge that the candidate
 faces to read, understand or interpret the question.
• Task difficulty: Refers to the difficulty the candidates faces when trying to formulate or produce an answer.
• Expected response difficulty: Refers to the difficulty the candidates face due to how the response is
 formulated or how marks are allocated for the question;

 Formal Assessment: Grade 12

 SBA Term 1 SBA Term 2 SBA Term 3 Term 4 Promotion mark

 Task 1 Task 3 Task 4 SBA: Term1+2+3=300÷3 = 100
 March Control Test Three (3) Practical Preparatory
 Examination
 Lessons PAT: Practical examination = 100
 Task 2
 Three (3) Practical NSC Examination paper = 200
 Lessons

 100 100 100 100

** SBA = School based Assessment
In Grade 12 only one internal exam is compulsory. Schools may therefore:
• Write both exams; or
• Replace one of the exams with a test at the end of the term. This test will have the same weighting as the
 exam and must cover a substantial amount of work.

4.4 Types of formal assessment for Consumer Studies in Grades 10-12

4.4.1 Controlled Tests
Criteria for setting a question paper for a test or an examination in Grades 12
• A test for formal assessment may NOT comprise of a series of smaller tests. This creates an overload of
 assessment by adding the additional layers of assessment.
• A substantial amount of content must be included for assessment and the duration should be 45 to 60 minutes.

 45
 It is compulsory to include questions that require:
• Longer reflective responses in a paragraph format.
• Higher order thinking skills that require substantiating evidence/motivations/arguments.
• Source based questions such as: Case studies; scenarios; extracts; pictures/flow charts /tables/graphs/
 cartoons/advertisements/menus for interpretation.
• The first page of the test must include: The name of the school; the date; name of the subject; grade; time
 allocation; name and number of the SBA task; mark total; name of the examiner and moderator;
• All test papers must be neatly typed;
• All graphics / illustrations should be print clear;
• The question paper should be error free e.g. no spelling, language, translation or mark allocation errors are
 allowed;
• It is compulsory for all tests to include TWO sections (Section A (Shot questions) and Section B (Long
 questions));
• Each test must cater for a balanced range of cognitive levels as well as align to the prescribed range for levels
 of difficulty.
• An item and error analysis of learner performance must be completed after marking a formal assessment task.
 The purpose of the analysis is to expose a lack of knowledge and understanding or poorly developed skills. It
 further assists to identify the most suitable intervention strategy to improve the level of knowledge and
 understanding to improve learner performance.

The mark allocation and suggested weighting of topics according to time spent per topic for tests is indicated in the
table below.
TASK 1: MARCH TEST Grade 12
 Marks Teaching time per
 Content
 (minimum) topic
 SECTION A (Short questions)
 Short questions (all topics)
 Question 1 20
 Compulsory: Include a variety of question types
 SECTION B (Long questions)
 Question 2 Clothing 20 4 weeks
 Question 3 Entrepreneurship 20
 6 weeks
 Question 4 Entrepreneurship 20
 Total 80
 Time 1 hour

 46
 Criteria for setting a Marking Guideline
 • The first page must contain: The name of the school; the date; name of the subject; grade; time allocation;
 name and number of the SBA task; mark total; name of the examiner and moderator.
 • All marking guidelines must be neatly typed.
 • No spelling, language or translation errors are allowed.
 • The numbering format must be correct and the numbering must align accurately with the question paper.
 • Indicate the mark allocation for each fact with a tick .
 • Include all the alternative responses that are considered as correct answers on the Marking Guideline.

4.4.2 Examinations
• Each question paper must cater for a balanced range of cognitive levels as well as align to the prescribed
 range for levels of difficulty.
• The mark allocation to weight the content for the Trial and November examination papers in all grades are
 indicated in the table that follows.

 Grade 12: Trial Examination and Nov NSC Examination Weighting of Marks per topic
 Content Grade 12

 SECTION A (Short questions)
 Question 1 Short questions (all topics)
 Compulsory: Include a variety of question 40
 types
 SECTION B (Long questions)
 Question 2 The Consumer 40
 Question 3 Food and Nutrition 40
 Question 4 Clothing 20
 Question 5 Housing 20
 Question 6 Entrepreneurship 40
 Total 200
 Time 3 hours

 47
 4.4.3 PRACTICAL WORK

(a) Practical lessons

• Grade 12: learners must each do a minimum of six (6) assessed practical lessons during the year, three
 in each of the first two terms.
• Examples of suggested products for the assessed practical lessons are reflected in the Teaching plans for
 each practical option.
• Standardise the development and progression of practical skills in the province to ensure that skills
 progress from basic to more advanced skills to improve the employability of the learner.
• Ensure that a variety of skills are prioritised in the Practical Lessons.
• Target scarce skills to improve unemployment.
• The following skills need to be infused into lessons to strengthen: (a) Values; (b) Indigenous knowledge
 systems; (c) Soft skills to strengthen emotional intelligence, self-management and self-confidence; (d)
 Communication skills (e) Sustainable business practice skills e.g. Effective waste management and eco-
 friendly business practice skills.
• Ensure that soft skills are a focus area to develop and strengthen personal self-management skills, to
 improve the employability of the learner.
• Practical Lessons need to link to entrepreneurial principles to develop entrepreneurial mind sets to
 participate and contribute towards the South African economy.

(b) Practical Assessment Task (PAT) in Grade 12
• The practical tests for the PAT Examination in Grades 12 are set internally by the teacher and are
 moderated and approved externally by the Subject Advisor to ensure that the applied techniques show
 progression for the development of skills from basic to more advanced skills.
• The practical tests for the PAT Examination are set internally by the teacher and are moderated and
 approved externally by the Subject Advisor to ensure that the applied techniques show progression for the
 development of skills from basic to more advanced skills in Grade 12.
• The PAT in each practical option consists of one Practical examination for the practical option selected by
 the school.
• No changes/amendment may be implemented to the expected outcomes as indicated in the PAT task for
 the current year in the practical option that was selected by the school. Provincial Departments of Education
 or teachers may not change or retype the PAT task for the current year or implement PAT tasks from a
 previous year of assessment.

 48
 • Instructions/Guidelines for the Grade 12 Practical Assessment Task Guidelines will be sent to schools at
 the end of the previous academic year. Teachers will select recipes/patterns and plan the tests according
 to the instructions for the assessment indicated in the PAT task for the current year.
• In Grade 12 the practical examinations take place in terms 3. In consultation with the Subject Advisor the
 Grade 12 PAT may be implemented in term 2.
• Provincial Departments of Education or teachers may not change or retype the PAT task for the current year
 or implement PAT tasks from a previous year of assessment.
• The date for the PAT practical examination in Grade 12 (Term 3) should be discussed and negotiated well
 in advance with the Subject Advisor and/or Provincial Subject Head to attend the exam.

Duration for the Practical examinations in each practical option

 FOOD PRODUCTION

 Grade 12 15 minutes: Reading time 2
 hours: Production
 45 minutes: Evaluation

 CLOTHING PRODUCTION

 Grade 12 1 hour: Lay out and cutting
 3 hours: (Completing the article)

 KNITTING AND CROCHETING PRODUCTION

 Grade 12 8 hours (To be conducted in two sessions with a break in-between/over 2 days)

 SOFT FURNISHING PRODUCTION

 Grade 12 I hour: Layout and cutting
 3 hours: (Completing the article)

 PATCHWORK AND QUILTING BY HAND PRODUCTION

Grade 12 1 hour: Lay out and cutting
 4 hours: (To be conducted in two sessions with a break in-between)

 49
 4.6 Moderation of assessment

4.6.1 Formal assessment (SBA)

• Grades 12 tasks are internally controlled and moderated by the HOD/ Subject Head of the school. It is
 compulsory for the Subject Advisor to moderate a sample of each task during his or her school visits, to
 verify the standard of the internal moderation process.
• It is compulsory for District and Provincial moderation to take place. This process is managed by the
 Provincial Education Department.

4.6.2 Practical assessment task (PAT)

• Grade 12: The Practical Assessment Task (PAT) will be externally moderated by the Subject Advisor and/or
 Provincial Subject Head for Consumer Studies.
• Grade 12 Food production: In term 3, the last group of learners (maximum 12) will be externally moderated
 at the school, while performing the practical examination. The moderator will assess the learners in the
 group independently from the teacher while they perform the examination. Afterwards the moderator will
 compare his or her assessment with the assessment of the teacher. A block adjustment could then be made,
 if necessary.
• Grades 12 Clothing, Soft Furnishing, Knitting and Crocheting, Patchwork and Quilting: The teacher
 assesses the practical examination and keeps the articles for external moderation. The Subject Advisor will
 visit the school for moderation in term 3 or 4, on a date communicated to the school. A block adjustment
 could then be made, if necessary.

 50
 9. Economics

4.4 Programme of assessment
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
throughout the year. The requirements (number and nature of tasks) for Economics are indicated below:

The Programme of Assessment in Grade 12

 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4

 Assessment

 150 150 150 150
 Total 50 100 50 50 (P1) (P2) 100 (P1) (P2)

 Term Reporting 25% 75% 100% 25% 37.5% 37.5% 300 400

4.4.1 ther forms of assessment

Assignments
An assignment in economics at the FET phase is one of the formal assessment tasks which is classified as a non-
test / examination task where learners are expected to complete it over a specific time period (e.g.2 or 3 days). It
gives learners an opportunity to apply the knowledge and skills in class to solve certain problems or economic
issues.

The following should be adhered to:
• At least two sub- topics of macroeconomics must be covered (challenging sub- topics).
• A range of cognitive levels to be examined through different question techniques (E.g. short questions, data
 response items, shorter paragraphs, etc.)
• It must be accompanied by a marking guideline
• Mark allocation must be in line with examination guideline.
• Open ended questions must also have possible responses in the marking guideline.

 51
 Research Project

A project in each of the grades is mandatory. Only one project per annum is recommended per grade. When
preparing a project, consider the following minimum requirements:
• Learners should be given the necessary guidance prior to the commencement of the project and progress
 must be monitored.
• All criteria used to assess the project must be discussed with the learners (Rubric).
• The teacher must use the rubric in conjunction with the marking guideline.
• Generally, projects are given a longer period of time as they involve some form of research, consolidating
 and choosing relevant information and preparing a written document as evidence.
• Projects generally work well if they are structured around some form of problem.
• Research often forms part of the project - the project is the evidence of the research conducted. However
 sometimes projects involve the development of skills.
• The purpose of a research project is to develop the research, critical thinking and problem- solving skills of
 learners.
• Projects should ideally be given to learners towards the end of a particular term, e.g. the first term for
 submission during the next (second) term.

Case Study
• Case studies are a very good way of keeping the subject up to date and relevant.
• Learners are presented with a real-life situation, a problem or an incident related to the topic
• They are expected to assume a particular role in articulating the position.
• They would draw on their own experience, the experience of peers or prior learning to interpret, analyse and
 solve the problem or problems.
• Data response items using newspaper articles, magazine articles, video clips, and TV or radio presentations
 form excellent case studies.
• Learners have to read and/or listen, digest the information and then make informed decisions.
• Questions can be from lower order - direct quotes from the article - to higher order when they are asked to
 analyse comments and possibly make suggestions.

Controlled test
One test written under controlled conditions, is prescribed for Grades 12. The test should adhere to the following:
• It should be completed by all classes in the same grade on the same day.
• All learners write the same test, completed under examination conditions.

 52
 • Questions must comply with year-end examination standards.
• Questions must comply with year-end examination standards.
• Where there is more than one teacher, agreement must be reached on the scope, as well as the date and
 time of the test.
• The duration of the test should be at least one and a half hours for 100 marks.
• The test should cover the different cognitive levels as in examinations. See table on cognitive levels under
 ‘Examinations’ in the section that follows.
• The test should also include problem-solving questions.
• The test should cover a range of integrated topics, as determined by the work schedule and assessment
 plan.
• The controlled test should be written in Term 1.

4.4.2 Examinations

The following guidelines should be considered when constructing examinations:
• Content

 Content stipulated specifically for the grade 100%
Content stipulated specifically for the grade 100%
• Cognitive levels

 Basic thinking skills (e.g. factual recall, low-level application and low-level comprehension) 30%

 middle-order thinking skills (e.g. more advanced application, interpretation and low-level 40%
 analysis)

 higher-order thinking skills (e.g. advanced analytical skills, synthesis and evaluation) 30%
• Problem solving
Approximately 10% of all examinations should address problem-solving questions. These include the solving of
real- life problems within the context of the Economics curriculum. Problem-solving questions must also cover a
range of cognitive skills (lower, middle and higher order) to cater for all learners but within the context of the
learners.

While evaluation and analysis can form very interesting problem-solving questions, the topic goes a lot further and
should be integrated into all aspects of the curriculum so that the learners develop the skills to apply their
knowledge acquired.

 53
 Mid-year examinations
The June examination has been cancelled.

Trial examination (Grade 12 only)
A trial examination is one of the seven tasks of the programme of assessment for Grade 12, ideally the trial
examination should cover the full scope of the Grade 12 curriculum and should model the final Grade 12
examination. Below is an outline of the structure of the trial examination:

 Macroeconomics & Microeconomics &
 Paper Time Marks Economic pursuits Contemporary economic
 issues

 Grade 12 2 2 hours 150 25 % & 25 % 25% & 25 %

End-of-year examinations
All grades in the FET band should write 2 x 2-hour examination papers of 150 marks each as a final examination.
The following is an outline of how the topics should be covered in the end-of-year examinations:

 Macroeconomics Microeconomics &
 Paper Time Marks & Economic Contemporary economic issues
 pursuits

 Grade 12 2 2 hours 150 25 % & 25 % 25% & 25 %
.

 54
 10. Electrical Technology: Power Systems, Electronics and Digital Electronics

 4.5 Assessment

 4.5.1 Programme of Assessment
 The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
 throughout a term. Without this programme, assignments and tasks are crowded into the last few weeks of
 the term creating unfair pressure on the learners

 PROGRAMME OF
 ASSESSMENT

 School–based Assessment Practical Assessment Task Final Examination
 SBA PAT

 25% 25% 50%

 The table below shows the compilation of the school based assessment mark:

 Description Time Frame Marks

 Assignment Term1 50

 PAT Simulation Term2 200

 Preparatory examination Term3 200

 Total 450

 The following is the Programme of Assessment for Grades 12.

GRADE 12 ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS

 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4 % OF FINAL MARK Weighting
ASSESSMENT TASKS
 PROMOTION MARK

Assignment 1 5

PAT Simulation 1 25

preparatory examination 1 20

Practical Assessment Task (PAT) 25

Final examination 1 50

TOTAL – PROMOTION MARK

 55
 4.5.2 Assignment

• An assignment must be in the form of a written work which may include the following; Research, Case study,
 Drawings and Calculations.
• It should cover term1 content and the duration should be 60 minutes.
• The mark allocation should be 50 marks
• Each Assignment must cater for a range of cognitive levels or skills.
• The forms of Assessment used should be Grade and development level appropriate.
• The design of these tasks should cover the content and context

4.5.3 Examinations

• Each examination must cater for a range of cognitive levels
• There is no June Examination in Electrical Technology
• A Formal Prescribed Simulation will be Assessed in June.
• The mark allocation of the three –hour Preparatory examination is 200 marks
• The Preparatory examination papers is set by the teacher and must be moderated by head of department
 at the school and approved by the District Curriculum advisors / facilitator. This is done to ensure that the
 prescribed weightings are adhered to by the teacher.
• The mark allocation of the externally three –hour final examination is 200 marks
• In the Grade 12 examination only Grade 12 content will be assessed. However, prior knowledge from
 Grades
 10 – 11 may be necessary to interpret and answer some other questions

4.5.4 Practical Assessment Task (PAT)

The Department of Basic Education issues a Practical Assessment Task for Grade 12 every year. The practical
assessment tasks for Grade 12 will be assessed by the teacher and will be externally moderated by the provincial
subject specialists.

The date for the external moderation will be decided by the province in which the school is situated. The provincial
education departments or schools may not change the prescribed task or use the task of the previous year.
Provision of the resources for the Practical Assessment Task is the responsibility of the school and schools should
ensure that adequate time and funding is allocated for the completion of the Practical Assessment Task.

 56
 Compilation of the Electrical Technology PAT Grades 12 mark is detailed in the table below:

 Description Time Frame Marks

 Simulation / Experiment 1 January – March 50

 Simulation / Experiment 2 April – June 50

 (Project)Final Product January – September 150

 Total 250

Two simulations/experiments and one project are prescribed. The simulations must be completed in term1 and
term 2. Although the final PAT (project/) product only needs to be completed in the third term, learners should start
working on the project from the first term in order to avoid running out of time to complete the PAT.

4.6 Examination Weighting in Electrical Technology

4.6.1 Examination Weighting in Digital Electronics
The following table shows the weighting of topics in Electrical Technology: Digital Electronics

 Grade 12

 Marks
 Topic Percentage
 +/- 4 Marks

 1 Multiple Choice Questions 7.5% 15

 2 Occupational Health and Safety 5% 10

 3 Switching and Control Circuits 25% 50

 4 Semiconductors 10% 20

 5 Digital and Sequential Devices 27.5% 55

 6 Microcontrollers 25% 50

 Total 100% 200 Marks

 57
 4.6.2 Examination Weighting in Electronics

Examination Weighting in Electronics

The following table shows the weighting of topics in Electrical Technology: Electronics

 Grade 12

 Marks
 Question Topic Percentage
 +/- 4 Marks

 1 Multiple Choice Questions 7.5% 15

 2 Occupational Health and Safety 5% 10

 3 RLC 17.5% 35

 4 Semiconductor Devices 22,5% 45

 5 Switching Circuits 25% 50

 6 Amplifiers 22.5% 45

 Total 100% 200 Marks

4.6.3 Examination Weighting in Electrical Technology: Power Systems
Examination Weighting in Power Systems
The following table shows the weighting of topics in Electrical Technology: Power Systems

 Grade 12

 Question Topic Percentage Marks +/- 4

 1 Multiple Choice Questions 7.5% 15

 2 Occupational Health and Safety 5% 10

 3 RLC 17.5% 35

 4 Three Phase AC Generation 17.5% 35

 5 Three Phase Transformers 15% 30

 6 Three Phase Motor Control 17.5% 35

 7 Programmable Logic Controllers (PLC) 20% 40

 Total 100% 200

 58
 11. Engineering Graphics & Design (EGD)

The 2021 minimum formal assessment requirements for Engineering Graphics and Design are as follow:
GRADE 12:
• Fifteen course drawings
• One PAT
• Trial/preparatory examination
• The final NSC examination

The weightings of the cognitive levels for the EGD formal assessment tasks are as follows:

 Cognitive Levels Percentage of Tasks

 Low order: Understanding and remembering ± 30%

 Middle order: analysis and applying ± 40%

 High order: Creating and evaluating ± 30%

4.4 Projects

The only 2021 project for Engineering Graphics and Design is the Practical Assessment Task (PAT). The EGD
PAT is implemented across the first three terms of the school year and should be undertaken as one extended
task, which is broken down into three different phases. Each EGD learner has to complete one PAT for every year
of the FET phase. (See 4.9)

Instead of an additional project(s), EGD makes use of course drawings (CD’s), which should come from the
normal yet essential developmental process of regular drawing and analytical tasks, as part of the formal
assessment program. (See 4.5.5.2)

 59
 4.5 Programme of assessment

4.5.2 Grade 12

 2021 GRADE 12 FORMAL ASSESSMENT PROGRAMME

 INTERNAL FORMAL ASSESSMENT: 25% EXTERNAL FORMAL ASSESSMENT: 75%

 SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT: PRACTICAL ASSESSMENT TASK (PAT): NOVEMBER NSC EXAMINATION:
 25% (internally set and assessed) 25% (externally set and internally assessed) 50% (externally set and assessed)

 The final mark for each paper will be
 LEARNER’S EGD FILE LEARNER’S PAT FILE/PORTFOLIO a mark that has been converted
 from 200 to 100.

 Course Drawings: PAT Part A: Paper 1:
 All the prescribed and other The Design Process 3 hrs 100
 40
 formally assessed and & (200 marks ÷ 2 = 100)
 recorded tasks PAT Part B: Paper 2:
 Presentation drawings of Part A 3 hrs
 Examinations: 100
 60 (Instrument & CAD) (200 marks ÷ 2 = 100)
 Preparatory (September)

 Total 100 Total 100 Total 200

4.5.3.3 Grade 12

2021 GRADE 12 ANNUAL FORMAL ASSESSMENT PLAN

 ASSESSMENT TASKS TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4 PROMOTION MARK

 Internal examinations 1 60 (15%)

 Course drawings 6 4 5 40 (10%)

 Done over first 3 terms and
 PAT: Part A & Part B record for the 4th. 1 100 (25%)

 NSC examination 1 200 (50%)

 TOTAL 400 (100%)

 60
 4.5.4 The compulsory 2021 EGD school-based assessment (SBA) tasks for each term

This is a detailed overview of each term’s compulsory school-based assessment (SBA) tasks. All the compulsory
SBA tasks are part of the compulsory Programme of Formal Assessment. The compulsory SBA tasks for a specific
term, with the exception of the PAT, has to be recorded during that specific term and included as part of the terms
reported mark.

The indicated compulsory SBA tasks are in accordance with the suggested annual teaching plans that are included
in this document.

NOTE:
The indicated compulsory SBA tasks are the minimum requirements for each term.
4.5.4.3 Grade 12

 2021 GRADE 12 COMPULSORY SCHOOL-BASED ASSESSMENT TASKS

 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3

 Suggested Suggested Suggested
 Assessment Tasks Assessment Tasks Assessment Tasks
 Contribution Contribution Contribution

 Course drawings: Course drawings: Course drawings:
 • 1st mechanical • Isometric drawing • Loci (cam)
 assembly • Solid geometry • Loci (mechanisms)
 • Mechanical 100% • Interpenetration & 100% • Loci (helix) 25%
 analytical exercise development • Development of a
 • Civil sectional • 2nd mechanical transition piece
 elevation assembly • 3rd mechanical
 • Civil floor plan with assembly
 elevations
 Preparatory
 • Civil site plan
 examination:
 • Two-point 75%
 Paper 1 and Paper
 perspective
 2

 61
 4.5.5 The EGD formal assessment tasks

4.5.5.2 Course drawings

The purpose of the course drawings is to provide evidence that ALL the topics have been adequately covered and
that all the learners have been assessed and given sufficient feedback on their acquired knowledge and skills in
common tasks on the prescribed content of each topic.

Engineering Graphics & Design is both a knowledge and application/skill-based subject. Drawing and analytical tasks
should be done on a regular (daily) basis. From this normal yet essential developmental process of regular (daily)
tasks, various common tasks have to be selected from the prescribed content of each topic. The selected common
tasks have to be formally assessed and recorded as part of the compulsory Programme of Formal Assessment.
The selected common tasks will be referred to as course drawings (CDs).

Requirements for Course Drawings (CDs):

• CDs must come from the normal teaching and learning process of EGD and should therefore be one
 or more of the regular (daily) tasks, referred to a Daily Developmental Exercises (DDEs);
• The teacher has to ensure that each CD is each learner’s own work;
• All learners have to be afforded extended opportunities, within realistic time frames, to attempt to complete
 correctly or incorrectly, each of the CDs;
• The recorded CD mark should address all, or most, of the grade-specific content of the topic
 and of an appropriate higher order of complexity for the specific grade. More than one task should
 be used to obtain the recorded CD mark;
• To ensure that all CDs comply with test and examination requirements and standards, all CDs,
 with the exception of the analytical exercises and the perspective drawings, have to be tasks
 that are completely redrawn;
• The questions and model answers of all CDs must be in the teacher’s g r a d e s p e c i f i c
 EGD file, and all the assessed and recorded CDs of each learner must be in his/her EGD file;
• Simplified rubrics may be used to assess all CDs;
• CDs are compulsory formal assessment tasks that have to contribute to the final promotion mark;
• It is important to note that CDs are not tests;
• Detailed descriptions of all CDs are on the last two pages of this document (See APPENDIX 4).

 62
 4.5.5.3 Examinations

The Engineering Graphics & Design examination papers should, in terms of format and content, be of a similar or higher
standard than the DBE’s examination/exemplar papers. The mark allocations should also be similar to the DBE’s
examination/exemplar papers.

In order to ensure the validity of examination papers, all papers should consist of original questions. Complete previous EGD
exam papers, whether internally or externally set, may therefore not be used again. However, individual questions from a
previous question paper may, preferably with some changes, be used again.

Format and composition of final EGD examination papers:

 2021 GRADE 12 EXAMINATION PAPERS

 PAPER 1 -CIVIL- PAPER 2 -MECHANICAL-
 (3 hours) In first-angle orthographic projection (3 hours) In third-angle orthographic projection

 Q1 Civil analytical ± 15% Q1 Mechanical analytical ± 15%

 Solid geometry Loci of a Cam
 and/or Interpenetration and and/or Loci of a point(s) of a
 Q2 ± 20% Q2 ± 20%
 development mechanism
 and/or development of a transition piece and/or Loci of a Helix

 Q3 2-point perspective drawing ± 20% Q3 Isometric drawing ± 20%

 Civil working drawing including electrical
 Q4 ± 45% Q4 Mechanical assembly ± 45%
 features

4.10 Progression/promotion marks

 2021 GRADE 12 PROGRESSION/PROMOTION MARK

 Assessment Tasks Compulsory contribution

 ALL course drawings (15 CDs) 40 (10%)
 SBA
 Prelim/preparatory examinations: Paper 1 and Paper 2 60 (15%)

 Practical Assessment Task (PAT) 100 (25%)

 November (final) examination: Paper 1 (100 marks) and Paper 2 (100 marks) 200 (50%)

 TOTAL 400

 63
 12. First Additional Languages

Note: Refer to Section 4 of the CAPS

4.4 Programme of Assessment
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout a term.
4.4.1 Overview of requirements

The following tables provide an overview of the Programme of Assessment requirements for each term for

First Additional Languages:
Table 3: Overview of Programme of Assessment Requirements Grade 12

 Programme of assessment
 External examination
 Tasks per term

 Term 1: Term 2: Term 3:
 Term 4:
 1 Written Test 3 Tasks 1 Trial examination comprising 3
 1 External Examination
 + Papers:
 comprising 3 Papers:
 3 Tasks Paper 1– Language in context
 Paper 1– Language in context
 (80) – 2 hrs
 (80) – 2 hrs
 Paper 2– Literature (70) –
 Paper 2– Literature (70) - 2,5 hrs
 2,5 hrs
 Paper 3 – Writing (100) - 2,5 hrs
 Paper 3 – Writing (100) - 2,5 hrs
 + Paper 4–Oral (50)
 + 1 Task

 Term mark (Terms 1-3)
 Each term, add totals for each task and convert to % for term mark.
 SBA mark:
 Add totals for tasks from term 1 to term 3, excluding oral marks, and convert to 25%,
 External examination
 • Convert Paper 1 to 20%,
 • Convert Paper 2 to 17,5%,
 • Convert Paper 3 to 25%,
 • Add totals for orals tasks throughout the year and convert to 12,5% (Paper 4).

 64
 Table 4: Programme of assessment Grade12

 Programme of assessment

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1

 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Task 4

 *Oral: Writing: (50 marks) Writing: (30 marks) **Test: (40 marks)
 Listening for Narrative/descriptive/ Longer Transactional writing: Friendly/formal Comprehension and
 comprehension discursive/ letters (request/ complaint/application/ business) Summary
 (10) argumentative/ reflective /formal and informal letters to the press/ OR Comprehension &
 curriculum vitae and covering letter/obituary/ Language structures and
 agenda and minutes of meeting/report/ review/ conventions
 newspaper article/ magazine article/ dialogue/
 interview/ email

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2
 Task 5: Task 6: Task 7

 *Oral: *Oral: Literature: (35 marks) Assignment
 Prepared speech ONE of the following:
 (20) Prepared reading aloud/ unprepared
 speech/ informal speaking in group (20)

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3

 Task 8

 Trial examinations: (250 marks)
 Paper 1 – Language in context (80) – 2 hrs
 Paper 2 – Literature (70) – 2,5 hrs
 Paper 3 – Writing (Can be written in August/September) (100) – 2,5 hrs

 Evidence must be available of informal assessment of writing activities: essays, longer and shorter transactional texts in each term
 according to the requirements of the Teaching Plans.
*Oral: Learners should do one listening comprehension task (Task 1), one prepared speech task (Task 5), and one other
(Task 6), e.g. prepared reading aloud/ unprepared speech/ informal speaking in group work during the year.

**Test could be set out of 40 marks or, if more, should be converted to 40 marks. While the Comprehension, Summary,

Language structures and conventions combination is suggested, teachers are urged to design a combination of aspects that
fits the character (test programme, time allocation, etc.) of the school.
A test in the Programme of Assessment should not be made up of several smaller tests. Each test should cover a substantial
amount of content, should be set for 45-60 minutes, and should reflect the different cognitive levels as set out for exam
papers.

 65
 13. Geography

4.3.1 Summary of formal assessments expected in Grade 12
 Grade 12 Research SBA (100)
 Mapwork task
 2 Controlled Tests
 Trial Exam
 End-of-year examination Paper 1 = 120 (2 x 60)
 30 (1 x 30)
 Total: 150
 Paper 2 = 120 (2 x 60)
 30 (1 x 30)
 Total: 150
 TOTAL SBA (100) + End-of-year (300) 400

In Grade 12 the Programme of Assessment comprises of six tasks. The five tasks completed during the school year are
internally assessed and make up 25% of the total mark for Geography, while the sixth task is the end-of-year examination
that is externally set and marked. The external examination makes up the remaining 75%.

4.3.2 Formal assessment requirements for Geography

(a) Assessment Tasks: Research and Mapwork

 Assessment tasks should cover the geographical content and concepts highlighted in the curriculum. Some examples of
 geographical competencies that may be assessed in the formal assessment tasks are listed below. These geographical
 competencies may form the focus of specific tasks or they may be used together as part of a task. Learners should
 demonstrate competence in various combinations of the following during the grade:

 • reading, analysing and interpreting maps, photographs and satellite images;
 • drawing, analysing and interpreting graphs;
 • drawing and labelling sketch maps;
 • labelling diagrams;
 • using models;
 • working with a variety of data;
 • analysing and synthesising information from different sources;
 • conducting fieldwork, recording and interpreting findings
 • working with concepts, data, procedures related to GIS;
 • conducting and writing up research;

 66
 • writing paragraphs and essays; and
 • evaluating arguments and expressing and supporting a point of view.

(b) Controlled Tests

 A controlled test should be 60 marks and 60 minutes long. A test should also cover a significant amount of content and
 skills, such as a section of work that covers about four to six weeks. Tests may include a variety of assessments skills and
 techniques, such as multiple choice questions, matching columns one line answers, written paragraphs, labelling diagrams,
 doing calculations, working with data.
 Tests (including other formal assessment tasks) should cater for a range of cognitive levels as indicated above.

 NB. All formal assessment tasks must be done under CONTROLLED CONDITIONS, except the research task.

 (c) Examinations

 Grade 12
 The Prelim and the Final Geography Examination in Grade 12 shall comprise of TWO papers of 150 marks each; Paper 1
 (Climate and Weather, Geomorphology and Mapwork) and Paper 2 (Rural and Urban Settlement, Economic Geography of
 South Africa and Mapwork).

 These papers should cater for a range of cognitive levels outlined in Table 1. The outline of the structure of the preparatory
 examination and end-of-year examinations is provided in annexure 4.7.1.

4.4.1 Programme of Assessment in Grades 12

Grades 12
 Grade 12

Term Assessment Type of Raw Mark Term Weighting SBA Weighting
 no Assessment
1 1 Test 60 75%
 2 Research 100 25%
2 3 Mapwork 60 100%

3 4 Test 60 25%
 5 Preparatory Exam 300 75%
 SBA Mark 100
4 6 End-of-year external examination (Paper 1 and 2) 300
 Total Assessment 400
 Percentage 100%

 67
 4.4.2 Examples of possible assessment activities
Type of task Assessment options or combination of options (see 4.3.2a)

Assessment Task 2 • Analysing and synthesising information from different sources
Research • Conducting field work, recording and interpreting findings
(Grade 12) • Using and analysing case studies
 • Applying a variety of relevant GIS techniques
 • Evaluating arguments, expressing and/or supporting or disagreeing with a point of view with
 substantiation
Assessment Task 3 • Reading, analysing and interpreting topographical and orthophoto maps
Mapwork • Reading, analysing and interpreting different types of photographs
(Grade 12) • Reading and interpreting sketch maps
 • Conducting field work, recording and interpreting findings
 • Making sketches of features or patterns
 • Applying a variety of relevant GIS techniques
NB. Data Handling should be integrated in all the other formal assessment tasks

4.7 Annexures

4.7.1 Format of examinations in Grades 12

 GRADE 12 ONE PAPER ONLY
 Preparatory PAPER 1 PAPER 2
 & Marks Allocation : 150 Mark Allocation: 150
 End-of-year Time Allocation: 3 Hours Time Allocation: 3 Hours
 Question 1 Question 1
 (Climate and Weather) 60 Marks (Rural and Urban Settlements) 60 Marks
  Short objective questions (15 Marks)  Short objective questions (15 Marks)
  3 sub-questions of 15 marks each on Climate  3 sub-questions of 15 marks each on Rural and
 and Weather Urban Settlements
 NB. ONE paragraph question of 8 marks in any NB. ONE paragraph question of 8 marks in any
 of the three sub-questions of the three sub-questions

 Question 2 Question 2
 (Geomorphology) 60 Marks (Economic Geography of South Africa) 60 Marks
  Short objective questions (15 Marks)  Short objective questions (15 Marks)

 68
  3 sub-questions of 15 marks each on  3 sub-questions of 15 marks each on Economic
 Geomorphology Geography of South Africa
 NB. ONE paragraph question of 8 marks in any NB. ONE paragraph question of 8 marks with
 of the three sub-questions any of the three
 Question 3
Question 3 (Mapwork ) 30 Marks
(Mapwork ) 30 Marks  Map Skills and calculations (10 Marks)
 Map Skills and calculations (10 Marks)  Map interpretation (12 Marks)
 Map interpretation (12 Marks)  GIS (8 Marks)
 GIS (8 Marks)

 69
 14. History

4.4 History Programme of Assessment

The programme of assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
throughout a term.

 4.4.1. Programme of Assessment and weighting of tasks
Grade 12
Term Assessment Type of Assessment Raw Mark Term Weighting SBA Weighting
 no
1 1 Source-based and 100 25%
 Essay task
 (2 Hours)
 2 Standardised test, 100 75%
 which includes a
 source-based
 question and
 an essay (2 Hours)
2 3 Research 100 100%
 assignment

3 4 Source-based and 100 25%
 Essay task (2 Hour)
 5 Preparatory Exam 300 75%
 SBA Mark 100
4 6 End-of-year examination 300
 Total Assessment 400
 Percentage 100%

 70
 4.4.2 Examinations
Format of Grade 12 examinations

This examination includes two papers; each paper has six questions: three source-based questions
(one set on each topic) and three essay questions (one set on each topic). Candidates must answer
three questions: one source-based question, one essay question and one other question in each paper.
Candidates may answer an essay and a source-based question on the same topic.

Allocation of content per question paper

The mark allocation is 50 marks per question, with a total of 150 marks per paper.

PAPER 1

SOURCE-BASED QUESTIONS

Question 1 The Cold War: How did the Cold War period shape international relations after the
 Second World War?
 Question focus: Origins, Cold War in Europe and the Cuban crisis (case studies will be
 alternated every three years)

Question 2 Independent Africa: How was independence realised in Africa in the 1960s and
 1980s?
 Question focus: Africa in the Cold War

Question 3 Civil society protests, 1950s to 1970s: What forms of civil society protest emerged
 from the 1950s to 1970s?
 Question focus: Civil rights and Black Power Movements (questions will be alternated
 every three years)

 71
 ESSAYS
Question 4 The Cold War: How did the Cold War period shape international relations after the
 Second World War?

 Question focus: China and Vietnam (questions will be alternated every three years)
Question 5 Independent Africa: How was independence realised in Africa in the 1960s and
 1980s?
 Question focus: Successes and challenges faced by the Congo and Tanzania (case
 studies will be alternated every three years)
Question 6 Civil society protests from the 1950s to the 1970s: What forms of civil society protest
 emerged from the 1950s to 1970s?

 Question focus: Civil rights and Black Power movements (questions will be alternated
 every three years)

PAPER 2

 SOURCE-BASED QUESTIONS
 Question 1 Civil resistance, 1970s to 1980s: What forms of civil society protest
 emerged from the 1970s to 1980s?
 Question focus: The challenge of Black Consciousness in the 1970s or The
 crisis of Apartheid in the 1980s (question focus and questions will be
 alternated every three years)
 Question 2 The Road to democracy in South Africa and South Africans coming to
 terms with the past: How did South Africa emerge as a democracy from the
 crises of the 1990s and come to terms with the Apartheid past?

 Question focus: The TRC
 Question 3 The end of the Cold War and a new world order: How has the world
 changed since the 1980s?

 72
 Question focus: A new global world order

 ESSAY QUESTIONS
 Question 4 Civil resistance, late 1970s to 1980s: What forms of civil society protest
 emerged from the late 1960s to 1980s?

 Question focus: The crisis of Apartheid in the 1980s and nature of resistance
 and international response or The challenge of Black Consciousness in the
 1970s (question focus and questions will be alternated every three years)
 Question 5 The road to democracy in South Africa, and South Africans coming to terms
 with the past: How did South Africa emerge as a democracy from the crises of
 the 1990s, and how did South Africans come to terms with the Apartheid past?

 Question focus: Negotiated settlement and the government of national unity
 Question 6 The end of the Cold War and a new world order: How has the world changed
 since the 1980s?

 Question focus: The end of the Cold War and the events of 1989

Assessment of essay questions

Essays must have a formal structure that includes an introduction, which introduces the point of view
or the explanation; a main body, which develops an argument; and a conclusion. Credit will be given
for this structure. Candidates will be asked to discuss explain or assess the accuracy of a statement, or
to express an opinion.

Candidates will be assessed on their ability to:

• demonstrate thorough knowledge and understanding of the topic; use relevant information to
 answer the question;
• plan and structure an essay;
• use evidence to support an argument;
• develop and sustain an independent and well-balanced argument; and
• write chronologically, coherently and logically

 73
 GLOBAL ASSESSMENT OF ESSAYS: TOTAL MARKS: 50
 LEVEL 7 LEVEL 6 LEVEL 5 LEVEL 4 LEVEL 3 LEVEL 2 LEVEL 1
 Very well Very well Well Planned Shows Attempts Little or
 planned planned planned and some to no
 and and and construct evidence structure attemp
 structured structured structure ed an of a an t to
 essay. essay. d essay. argument planned answer. structu
 Good Developed Attempts . Evidence and Largely re the
 synthesis a relevant to is used to construct descriptiv essay.
 of line of develop some ed e, or
 PRESENTATI informatio argument. a clear extent to argument some
 ON n. Evidence argumen support . attempt
 Developed used to t. the line of Attempts at
 an original, defend the Conclusi argument to sustain developin
 well argument. on Conclusio a line of g a line of
 balanced Attempts drawn ns argument argument
 and to draw an from the reached . . No
 independe independe evidence based on Conclusio attempt
 nt line of nt to evidence. ns not to draw a
 CONTENT argument conclusion support clearly conclusio
 with the from the the line supporte n
 use of evidence of d by
 evidence, to support argumen evidence.
 sustained the line of t.
 and argument.
 defended
 the
 argument
 throughou
 t.

 74
 Independe
nt
conclusion
is drawn
from
evidence
to support
the line of
argument.

 75
 LEVEL 7
Question has
been fully
answered.
Content
 47–50 43–46
selection
fully relevant
to line of
argument.
LEVEL 6
Question has
been
answered.
Content 43–46 40–42 38–39
selection
relevant to
the line of
argument.
LEVEL 5
Question
answered to
a great
extent. 38–39 36–37 34–35 30–33 28–29
Content
adequately
covered and
relevant.

 76
 LEVEL 4
Question is
recognisable
in answer.
Some 30–33 28–29 26–27
omissions or
irrelevant
content
selection.
LEVEL 3
Content
selection
does relate
to the
question, but
does not
 26–27 24–25 20–23
answer it, or
does not
always relate
to the
question.
Omissions in
coverage.
LEVEL 2
Question
inadequately
 20 –23 18–19 14–17
addressed.
Sparse
content.

 77
 LEVEL 1
 Question
 inadequately
 addressed or
 14 –17 0–13
 not at all.
 Inadequate
 or irrelevant
 content.

 *Guidelines for allocating a mark for Level 1:
• Question not addressed at all / totally irrelevant content / no attempt to structure the essay = 0
• Content includes basic and generally irrelevant information; no attempt to structure the essay
=1-6
• Question inadequately addressed and vague; little attempt to structure the essay = 7 – 13

ESSAY MARKING SYMBOLS
Assessment procedures of the essay

2.4.1 Keep the synopsis in mind when assessing the essay.

2.4.2 During the reading of the essay, ticks need to be awarded for a relevant introduction (which is
indicated by a bullet in the marking guideline), the main aspects/body of the essay that
sustains/defends the line of argument (which is indicated by bullets in the marking guideline) and a
relevant conclusion (which is indicated by a bullet in the marking guideline).

For example, in an essay where there are five (5) main points there could be
about seven (7) ticks.

 78
 2.4.3 Keep the PEEL structure in mind in assessing an essay.

 P Point The candidate introduces the essay by taking a line of
 argument/making a major point.
 Each paragraph should include a point that sustains the major
 point(line of argument) that was made in the introduction
 E Explanation The candidate should explain in more detail what the main point is
 about and how it relates to the question posed (line of argument).
 E Example Candidates should answer the question by selecting content that is
 relevant to the line of argument. Relevant examples should be given
 to sustain the line of argument.
 L Link Candidates should ensure that the line of argument is sustained
 throughout and is written coherently.

 79
 4.4.4 Assessment of source-based questions

Sources will be grouped around a key question. The context of the sources will be provided so that
learners can use the sources to answer questions. Contextualisation includes the author or creator of
the source, the title of the publication in which the source appeared, and the date and place of
publication. Learners will therefore have the information to enable them to discuss the reliability or
usefulness of each source. All people in cartoons or photographs will be identified. Each source will be
a single source; no sources will be combined into a composite source.

• Candidates will be assessed on their ability to:
• demonstrate thorough knowledge and understanding of the topic;
• extract information from sources;
• interpret information from sources;
• identify and compare different perspectives within sources and between sources;
• explain the different perspectives within the sources in the context of the period studied;
• draw conclusions about the reliability and usefulness of sources; and
• synthesise information from a range of sources.

4.4.5 Guidelines for Grade 12 examination papers

Format of the question paper: Example

There are two question papers. Each question paper consists of the question paper and an addendum
containing sources. Each paper has six questions: three source-based questions and three essay
questions. Learners must answer three questions: one source-based, one essay and one other
question. Learners may answer two questions on the same topic.

 80
 HISTORY PAPER 1 MARKS: 150 TIME: 3 HOURS
 Instructions and information

1. This question paper consists of SIX (6) questions

 Questions 1 and 4

 The Cold War: How did the Cold War period shape international relations after the Second World
 War?

 Questions 2 and 5

 Independent Africa: How was independence realised in Africa in the 1960s and1980s?

 Questions 3 and 6

 Civil society protests, 1950s to 1970s: What forms of civil society protest emerged from the 1950s to
 1970s?

2. Each question counts 50 marks.

3. Candidates are required to answer THREE questions, ONE (1) source-based
 question, ONE (1) essay question and ONE (1) other, either an essay or a
 source-based question.
4. Learners may answer two questions on the same topic.
5. When candidates answer questions, they are required to demonstrate application of knowledge, skills
 and insight
6. Rewriting of the sources as answers will be to the disadvantage of candidates.
7. Write neatly and legibly.

 81
 SECTION A: SOURCE-BASED QUESTIONS

Question 1: The Cold War - origins, Cold War in Europe or the Cuban Crisis (alternate every three
 years)
Question 2: Case study Angola
Question 3: Civil society protests, 1950s to 1970s: Case Study - Black Power Movement
 or Civil Rights Movement (alternate every three years)

SECTION B: ESSAY QUESTIONS
Question 4: Cold War - China or Vietnam (alternate every three years)
Question 5: Independent Africa – A case study: Congo or Tanzania (alternate every
 three years)
Question 6: Civil society protests 1950s to 1970s: Case Study - US Civil Rights Movement
 or Black Power Movement (alternate every three years)
HISTORY PAPER 2 MARKS: 150 TIME: 3 HOURS

Instructions and information
1. This question paper consists of SIX (6) questions

Questions 1 and 4

Civil Resistance, 1970s to 1980s: What was the nature of the civil society resistance after 1960s?

Questions 2 and 5

The coming of democracy in South Africa and coming to terms with the past: How did South Africa
emerge as a democracy from the crises of the 1990s, and how did South Africa come to terms with
the Apartheid past?

 82
 Questions 3 and 6

The end of the Cold War and a new world order 1989 to the present: How has the world changed
since the 1989?

2. Each question counts 50 marks.

3. Candidates are required to answer THREE questions, ONE (1) source-based
 question, ONE (1) essay question and ONE (1) other, either an essay or a
4. source-based question.
5. Learners may answer two questions on the same topic.
6. When candidates answer questions, they are required to demonstrate application of knowledge,
 skills and insight
7. Rewriting of the sources as answers will be to the disadvantage of candidates.
8. Write neatly and legibly.

SECTION A: SOURCE-BASED QUESTIONS
Question 1: Civil resistance, 1970s to 1980s – The challenges of Black Consciousness to the
 apartheid state OR The crisis of apartheid in the 1980s (alternate every three years)
Question 2: The coming of democracy to South Africa and coming to terms with the past –The TRC
Question 3: The end of the Cold War and a new world order 1989 to the present – New global world
 order

SECTION B: ESSAY QUESTIONS

Question 4: Civil resistance – The crisis of apartheid in the 1980s OR The challenges of Black
Consciousness to the apartheid state (alternate every three years)
Question 5: The coming of democracy to South Africa and coming to terms with the past –
 Negotiated settlement and the Government of National Unity
Question 6: The end of the Cold War and a new world order 1989 to the present – The end of the
 Cold War and the events of 1989

 83
 An example of possible source-based questions

 In this section, we provide an example of a source-based question.
SECTION A: SOURCE-BASED QUESTIONS - 50 MARKS Question 1
The scaffolding of questions should be from simple to complex (level 1 to level 3)
This is how Source – Based questions should be arranged:
1. Study Sources 1A, 1B, 1C and 1D to answer the questions that follow:
 1.1 Refer to Source 1A.
1.1.1
1.1.2
1.2 Consult Source 1B.
1.2.1
1.2.2
1.3 Read Source 1C.
1.3.1
1.3.2
1.4 Use Source 1D.
1.4.1
1.4.2
LEVEL 1 Questions can be formulated as follows:
• Define the concept
 What information in the source tells you about...?
• Quote evidence from the source...
• Give reasons from the source….
• Mention / Name
• Identify
• What, according to the source, …?

 84
 LEVEL 2 Questions can be formulated as follows:
 • Explain the concept in the context of...?

 • What message does the cartoonist convey regarding ...?

 • Explain in your own words.

 • Why do you think...?

 • Comment on…

LEVEL 3 Questions can be formulated as follows:
 • Explain to what extent the evidence in Source 1A.
 • Compare the evidence in Sources 2A and 2B and explain how you would account for the
 differences/ similarities
 • Explain the usefulness/ limitations/ reliability/ validity/ justification of the Source
 regarding.
 • Using the relevant information from the sources and your own knowledge write a
 paragraph…

 85
 Allocation of content to essay and source-based questions:

 Question number
 and types of
 Topic Content questions

The Cold War How did the Cold War period shape international relations after World War Paper 1:
 II?
 Questions 1
 The origins of the Cold War (Overview– a broad narrative) Source-Based
 • End of Second World War (introduction) – why did a Cold War develop? question
 • USSR and USA and the creation of spheres of interest:
 -- Installation of Soviet friendly governments in satellite states
 -- USA’s policy of containment: Truman Doctrine; Marshall Plan
 -- Berlin Crises 1949–1961 (broad understanding of the crises-
 overview)
 -- Opposing Military alliances: NATO and Warsaw Pact (broadly)
 • Containment and brinkmanship: the Cuban crisis (as an
 example of containment and brinkmanship)
 • Who was to blame for the Cold War? (Interpretation – differing points of
 view – needs to be highlighted in the introductory overview to Grades 10- 12)
 Extension of the Cold War: case studies Question 4
 (Either China or Vietnam) Essay Question
 CHINA (examined every three years as an alternative to Vietnam)
 How did China rise as a world power after 1949?
 This section includes the following:
 • Introduction: Establishment of Communist China in 1949:
 events leading up to 1949 (not examinable)
 • The Five Year Plan 1953-1957
 • Hundred Flowers Campaign 1956-1957
 • The Great Leap Forward 1958-1961
 • Cultural Revolution 1966-1976
 • Chinese relations with the Soviet Union and the USA from
 1949 to 1973 (clash of ideologies more than individual events)
 (not examinable)
 • China’s changing relationships with neighbouring states:
 Tibet, India, Vietnam, Taiwan (not examinable)
 • To what extent was China established as a superpower by the
 time of Mao’s death?
 • Explain why China tried to improve relations with the USA
 after 1970 (not examinable)
 • Conclusion: impact of China’s economic liberalisation on
 relations with the rest of the world since Mao’s death until
 present. (not examinable)

 OR

 Question 4

 86
 VIETNAM (examined every three years as an alternative to China) Essay Question
 How was a small country like Vietnam able to win a war against the USA?
 (1954–1975)?

 This section includes the following:

 • Background: overview of the struggle against colonial powers
 prior to WW2
 • Immediate post-war period in Vietnam

 Stages in the war:
 • 1957–1965 Struggle in Vietnam between the South Vietnamese
 army and communist-trained rebels (also known as the Viet
 Cong)
 • 1965–1969 North Vietnamese-USA struggle (include the nature
 of the Vietnamese war against the USA)
 • The War from a Vietnamese and USA perspective
 • The War as a world issue
 • 1969–1975 USA withdrawal from Vietnam (Impact on USA
 politics – student movements – link to Topic 3)
 • Conclusion: How the war is remembered today in the USA
 and Vietnam?
Independent How was independence realised in Africa in the 1960s and 1980s? Question 5
Africa Essay Question
 What were the ideas that influenced the independent states
 (ideas that
 • Forms of government: political ideologies and economies - influenced
 African Socialist/ capitalist/Democratic /one-party states independent
 states included
 as introduction to the
 The two case studies Congo and Tanzania (1960 to 1980) are examples to
 topic)
 illustrate the political, economic, social and cultural successes and
 challenges in independent Africa (1960 to 1980). The two case studies will
 be examined separately and are to alternate every three years.

 The successes and challenges faced by the countries:

 • The kind of states: their aims/visions (political ideologies)
 • Political
 -- Types of leaders: Lumumba, Mobuto Sese Seko, Nyerere
 (What are the qualities of a good leader?)
 -- Legacies of colonialism
 -- Types of government
 -- Political stability and instability
 • Economic
 -- Types of economies (as third world countries)
 • Social and cultural
 -- Benefits of independence
 -- Education
 -- Africanisation

 What was the impact of the internal and external factors on Africa after Question 2
 the 1970s?

 87
 Source-based
 Africa in the Cold War: USSR, USA, Cuba, China and South Africa question

 Case study: Angola

 • Introduction: how Africa was drawn into the Cold War
 (Broadly)
 • Competing spheres of influence: trade, conflict, aid

 • Angola: colonialism and independence (Broad overview)

 • Outbreak of civil war 1974
 -- FNLA
 -- MPLA
 -- UNITA

 • Reasons for and nature of involvement in Angola (USSR,
 USA, Cuba, China, South Africa)

 • Impact on regional stability

 • Significance of the Battle of Cuito Cuanavale 1987/1988

 • The changing nature of international relationships after
 1989
Civil society What forms of civil society protest emerged from the 1950s to 1970s
protests
1950s- Overview of civil society protests:
1970s Research
 • Women’s liberation and feminist movements in the 1960s SBA (School based
 and 1970s: a middle class movement in the industrialised Assessment Task)
 countries.
 • Women’s identity in South Africa from the 1950s to 1970s:
 trade unionism, workers, their economic role in the rural
 areas and in the informal sector; as political anti-pass
 campaigners, initiatives taken within the liberation struggle
 including the middle class Black Sash
 • The peace movements: Disarmament; Students and anti-
 War movements
 • Civil rights movements
 What forms of civil society protest emerged from the 1950s to 1970s Question 3
 Source-based
 Case Study: The US Civil Rights Movement Question

 (alternated every three years as a source-based question)
 • Reasons and origins of Civil Rights Movement in the USA
 (background information only)
 1. Role, impact and influence of Martin Luther King Jr
 -- The influence of passive resistance (Gandhi) on Martin
 Luther King
 • Forms protest through civil disobedience: Montgomery bus
 boycott, sit-ins, marches including to Lincoln Memorial,

 88
 Birmingham campaign, Selma- Montgomery marches
 • School desegregation: case study Little Rock, Arkansas
 Freedom rides freedom summer
 • Short-term and long-term gains

 Black Power Movement
 Question 6
 (alternated every three years as an essay question)
 Essay question
 • Reasons for the movement
 • Black Panther
 • Roles of Malcolm X, Stokely Carmichael, Huey Newton and
 other African American activists
 • Short-term and long-term gains

 Conclusion: This includes an overview of the progress, if any, that was made
 towards equality and civil rights by the civil rights and Black Power
 Movement

Civil What was the nature of resistance by the civil society movements after the Paper 2:
Resistance 1970s?
late
1970s- Introduction (Not for exam purposes)
1980s:
South Africa
 • Nature of the apartheid state in the late 1970s and 1980s
 • Opposition: underground, in prison and in exile
 Question 4
 Essay question
 The challenge of Black Consciousness to the apartheid state
 (alternated every three years as an essay question)
 • The nature and aims of Black Consciousness

 • The role of Steve Biko with the emphasis on his ideas and
 writing (personal complexes are confining – people empower
 themselves)

 • Black Consciousness Movement (BCM)

 • Black Consciousness at first perceived by the government as in
 accord with apartheid theories of ‘own affairs; the challenge
 posed by the ideas of Black Consciousness to the state

 • The 1976 Soweto uprising – briefly, relating to the influence of
 BCM on the students

 • The legacy of Black Consciousness on South African politics.

 The crisis of apartheid in the 1980s

 Government attempts to reform apartheid (alternated every three years as Question 1
 a source-based question) Source-based
 Question

 89
 • The 1982 urban Bantu Authorities Act attempt to give more
 power to local councilors in the townships; the tri-cameral
 system

 Internal resistance to reforms

 • Growing power of Trade Union Movement from 1973: black
 workers rediscovered their power of labour; rapidly growing
 membership; political alliance formed with communities and
 liberation movements

 • Response to Botha’s “reforms”: new methods of mobilisation;
 labour’s ‘rolling mass action’; mass civic action to make the
 country ungovernable (role of civics, UDF, Mass Democratic
 Movement, End Conscription Campaign

 International response

 • International anti-apartheid movements

 Anti-Apartheid Movements in Britain and Ireland

 Activities of the Movements: sports boycott; cultural boycott; academic
 boycott; consumer boycott; disinvestment; sanctions; release Mandela
 campaign

 Support for the anti-apartheid struggle in Africa: Frontline states (Angola.
 Botswana, Mozambique, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe)

 Beginning of the end
 • South African economy in trouble feels the bite of International
 sanctions, disinvestment and boycotts coinciding with internal mass
 resistance

 • Secret negotiations with the ANC-in-exile and negotiations with Mandela
The road to How did South Africa emerge as a democracy from the crises of the 1990s
democracy and come to terms with the apartheid past?
in SA Questions 5
and coming The negotiated settlement and Government of National Unity Essay question
to terms • Beginning of negotiations 1990–1991: Unbanning of organisations;
with Debates around negotiations: talks about
the past talks, including Chris Hani’s objection to the talks;
 CODESA I; Role of the labour movement in
 negotiations; ANC gives up the armed struggle

 • Breakdown of negotiations: “Whites only” referendum
 (March) – de Klerk solution; Violence in the 1990s –
 debates around the violence; CODESA breaks down;
 Record of Understanding; Joe Slovo and the Sunset
 Clause

 90
 • Multi-party negotiation process resumes: Formal multi-
 party negotiations resumed in April; Murder of Chris Hani –
 significance to the process – date of elections set; ongoing
 violence; Attempts to derail negotiations; AWB invasion of
 World Trade Centre; St James Massacre; killing at the
 Heidelberg Tavern
 • Final road to democracy 1994: Violence again - Fall of
 Mangope and Gqozo and the Bophuthatswana shootings;
 Inkatha Freedom Party March to Shell House and Shell
 House Massacre; The Constitution and the Bill
 of Rights; Freedom Front and IFP join elections; 27 April
 election; The Government of National Unity
How has South Africa chosen to remember the past?
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission Question 2
 Source-based
 • Various forms of justice: retributive justice and Nuremberg; question
 restorative justice and the TRC.
 • Reasons for the TRC
 • Hearings
 (Case studies could include the various victims and perpetrators
 that appeared before the TRC)
 • The debates concerning the TRC
 -- Positive aspects: TRC as an instrument of
 reconciliation
 -- Amnesty provisions and problems with amnesty
 -- Focus on gross human rights of 1980s and ignoring
 institutional violence and the whole human rights
 abuses of apartheid
 -- Reparations
 • Responses of political parties and reasons for the
 responses to the TRC and the final report of the TRC:
 National Party, Inkatha Freedom Party, African National
 Congress
How has the world changed since the 1980s? The end of the Cold War: The Questions 6
events of 1989 Essay question
• Gorbachev’s reforms in the Soviet Union
• Eastern Europe
 -- Events in Poland – significance of ‘Solidarity’
 -- Significance of events in Poland for the decline of Soviet
 influence in Eastern Europe (not for exam purposes)
 -- Germany: The fall of the Berlin Wall
• The disintegration of the Soviet Union: to what extent were Gorbachev’s
reforms responsible?
• Turning point in South Africa: the collapse of the Soviet Union and its impact
on SA; Cuito Cuanavale and its impact; De Klerk, the release of political
prisoners in 1989, unbanning of organisations and the release of Nelson
Mandela in 1990
 The end of A new world order Question 3
the Cold Source-based
War and • What is globalisation? question
a new
global • Balance of power and impact on Africa: North-South and
world order South-South relations

 • Dominance of global capitalism: USA; Bretton Woods, IMF
 and World Bank; World Trade Organisation; Civil society
 resistance to global capitalism; IT revolution

 • Emerging economies and different forms of capitalism:

 •
 BRICS: Brazil. Russia, India, China and South Africa

 • Responses to globalisation, heralding an age of economic insecurity:
 nationalism, localisation (for example, the break- up of former Yugoslavia);
 extremism (for example, religious fundamentalism such as the Christian right
 and Islamic fundamentalism - 9/11and the consequences – the war on
 terror, Iraq); environmental movements.

 92
 15. Home Languages
Note: Refer to Section 4 of the CAPS
4.4 Programme of Assessment
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
throughout a term.

4.4.1 Overview of requirements
The following tables provide an overview of the Programme of Assessment requirements for each term
for Home Languages:
Table 3: Overview of Programme of Assessment Requirements Grade 12

 Programme of Assessment Tasks per Term External Examination

Term 1: Term 3: Term 4:
1 Written Test 1 Trial examination 1 External Examination comprising:
+ comprising: 3 Papers: 4 Papers:
4 Tasks Paper 1: Language in context (70)
 Paper 1: Language in context
 Term 2: - 2 hrs
 (70) - 2 hrs
 2 Tasks Paper 2: Literature (80) – 2,5 hrs
 Paper 2: Literature (80) – 2,5 hrs
 Paper 3: Writing (100) – 3 hrs
 Paper 3: Writing (100) – 3 hrs
 +
 + 1 Task
 Paper 4: Oral (50)

Term Mark (Terms 1-3):
• Each term, add totals and convert to % for term mark.
SBA Mark:
• Add totals for assessment tasks from term 1 to term 3, excluding oral marks, and convert to 25%,
External Examination
• Convert Paper 1 to 17,5%,
• Convert Paper 2 to 20%,
• Convert Paper 3 to 25%

 93
 • Add totals for oral tasks throughout the year and convert to 12,5% (Paper 4).

Table 4: Programme of Assessment Grade 12

 Programme of Assessment

 Term 1

 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Task 4 Task 5

 *Oral: Writing: Writing: (25 marks) *Oral: **Test: (35
 Listening for (50 marks) Transactional writing: Friendly/formal Unprepared marks)
 comprehension Narrative/ letters (request/ complaint/ speech (15 Language in
 (15 marks) descriptive/ application/ business/ formal and marks) context
 discursive/ informal letters to the press) Comprehension
 reflective/ curriculum vitae and covering letter/ Summary
 argumentative obituary/ agenda and minutes of Language
 essay meeting / formal or informal report/ structures and
 review/ newspaper article/ magazine conventions
 article/ speech/dialogue/ interview /
 email

 Term 2

 Task 6 Task 7

 Literature: (35 marks) Literature assignment
 *Oral:
 (35)
 Unprepared reading
 OR
 aloud/ Prepared speech
 Contextual questions (10 marks)
 (10 marks)
 and Literary essay (25 marks)

 Term 3

 94
 Task 8 Task 9

 *Oral: Trial examinations (250 marks)
 Unprepared reading aloud/ Paper 1 – Language in context (70 marks) - 2 hrs
 Prepared speech (10 marks) Paper 2 – Literature (80 marks) – 2,5 hrs
 Paper 3 – Writing (Can be written in August / September) (100 marks) – 3 hrs
*Oral: Learners should do one listening for comprehension (Task 1), one unprepared speech (Task 4), and either
two prepared speeches OR one prepared speech and one unprepared reading aloud (Task 7 and (Task 8).
**Test could be set out of 35 marks or, if more, should be converted to 35 marks. While the Comprehension,
summary, language structures and conventions combination is suggested, teachers are urged to design a
combination of aspects that fits the character (test programme, time allocation, etc.) of the school.
A test in the Programme of Assessment should not be made up of several smaller tests. Each test should cover a
substantial amount of content, should be set for 45-60 minutes, and should reflect the different cognitive levels as
set out for exam papers.

 95
 16. Hospitality Studies

4.3.1 The formal assessment requirements for Hospitality Studies

• Four formal School Based Assessment (SBA) tasks must be completed during the school year in Grade
 12 of which:
o Two formal theoretical SBA assessment tasks must be completed during the school year in Grade 12 in
 Terms 1-3.
o The two formal theoretical assessment tasks and two practical lesson tasks, consisting of six weekly
 practical lessons and two Skills Tests in Grade 12, to make-up the 25% of the total School based
 Assessment (SBA) mark for Hospitality Studies.
o The end-of-year assessment includes two parts: (1) A Practical Assessment Task (PAT) and (2) a
 written theory paper. Together these two parts make up the remaining 75% in Grade 12.
o Together, the three components constitute the end-of-year promotion mark of a 100%.
o The Skills tests are developed by the teacher and are externally moderated by the Subject Advisor /
 Provincial Subject Head.
o Assessment for the PAT is assessed internally by the teacher and Departmental Head responsible for
 Hospitality Studies. It is also moderated externally by the Subject Advisor / Provincial Subject Head.
o The end-of-year NSC assessment (50%) in Grade 12 is set, marked and moderated externally.
o Each task must cater for a balanced range of cognitive levels as well as align to the prescribed range for
 levels of difficulty as reflected in the tables that follow.
o An item and error analysis of learner performance must be completed after marking a formal assessment
 task. The purpose of the analysis is to expose a lack of knowledge and understanding or poorly developed
 skills. It further assists to identify the most suitable intervention strategy to improve the level of knowledge
 and understanding to improve learner performance.
o This process is verified externally by DBE/UMALUSI.

Formal assessment must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners

The cognitive demand in assessment should be appropriate for the age and developmental level of the learner.
Assessment in Hospitality Studies, must cater for a range of cognitive levels and learner abilities.

 96
 The assessment tasks should be designed carefully to cover the content in the subject as well as the range of skills
and cognitive levels, identified in the specific aims in Section 1 of the Hospitality Studies CAPS Policy Document.

 SUGGESTED WEIGHTING FOR COGNITIVE LEVELS

 Cognitive level Percentage

 Lower order:
 30%
 Remembering

 Middle order:
 Understanding 20% 50%
 Applying 30%

 Higher order:
 20%
 Analysing / Evaluating and Creating

The design of assessments should ensure that a full range of content and skills are assessed within each grade.
The specific aims, topics, content and range of skills in the subject should be used to inform the planning and
development of assessment tasks.
Formal assessment must cater for a range of levels of difficulty, as shown below.

 SUGGESTED WEIGHTING FOR LEVELS OF DIFFICULTY

 Levels of Difficulty Percentage

 Easy 30%

 Moderate 50%

 Difficult 20%

Examiners and moderators in all subjects are encouraged to think about the difficulty level of every question /skill
selected for assessment. In judging the level of difficulty the demand made on the cognitive ability of an average
learner as well as the intrinsic difficulty of the question or task is considered.

 97
 In making this judgement, the difficulty or ease of a particular question is identified. A four-category framework for
thinking about question or item difficulty adapted from Leong (2006) is used in this identification process.

This framework comprises the following four general sources of difficulty:

• Content difficulty: Classifies the difficulty of the subject matter, topic or conceptual knowledge of the
 content, where some content is inherently more difficult than other content.
• Stimulus difficulty: Relates to the linguistic features of the question and the challenge that the candidate
 faces to read, understand or interpret the question.
• Task difficulty: Refers to the difficulty candidates faces when trying to formulate or produce an answer.
• Expected response difficulty: Refers to the difficulty candidates faces due to how the response is
 formulated or how marks are allocated for the question.

 Formal Assessment: Grade 12

 SBA Term 1 SBA Term 2 SBA Term 3 Term 4 Promotion mark

 Task 1 Task 4 SBA
 March Control Test Preparatory Term1+2+3=300÷3 100
 Examination
 PAT = 100
 Task 2 Task 3 NSC Examination paper =
 Three (3) Practical Three (3) Practical 200
 Lessons Lessons
 One (1) Skills Test One (1) Skills Test

 100 100 100 100

**SBA: School Based Assessment
In Grade 12 only one internal exam is compulsory. Schools may therefore:
• Write both exams; or
• Replace one of the exams with a test at the end of the term. This test will have the same weighting as the
 exam and must cover a substantial amount of work.

 98
 4.4 Types of formal assessment for Hospitality Studies in Grades 12

4.4.1 Controlled Tests

Criteria for setting a question paper for a test or an examination in Grades 12

• A test for formal assessment may NOT comprise of a series of smaller tests. This creates an overload of
 assessment by adding the additional layers of assessment.
• A substantial amount of content must be included for assessment and the duration should be 45 to 60
 minutes.
• It is compulsory to include questions that require:
 o Longer reflective responses in a paragraph format.
 o Higher order thinking skills that require substantiating evidence/motivations/arguments.
 o Source based questions such as: Case studies; scenarios; extracts; pictures/flow charts /tables/graphs/
 cartoons/advertisements/menus for interpretation.
• The first page of the test must include: The name of the school; the date; name of the subject; grade;
 time allocation; name and number of the SBA task; mark total; name of the examiner and moderator;
• All test papers must be neatly typed;
• All graphics / illustrations should be print clear;
• The question paper should be error free e.g. no spelling, language, translation or mark allocation errors are
 allowed;
• It is compulsory for all tests to include TWO sections (Section A and B)
• Each test must cater for a balanced range of cognitive levels as well as align to the prescribed range for
 levels of difficulty.
• An item and error analysis of learner performance must be completed after marking a formal assessment
 task. The purpose of the analysis is to expose a lack of knowledge and understanding or poorly developed
 skills. It further assists to identify the most suitable intervention strategy to improve the level of knowledge
 and understanding to improve learner performance.

 99
 The mark allocation and suggested weighting of topics according to time spent per topic for tests is
indicated in the table below.

 TASK 1: MARCH TEST
 Grade 12

 Marks Teaching time per topic
 Content
 (minimum)

 Section A Short questions (all topics)
 Question 1 Compulsory: Include a variety of question 15
 types

 Section B
 Hygiene 5 1 week
 Question 2

 Section C
 Nutrition and Menu Planning, 25 4 weeks
 Question 3

 Question 4 Food commodities 25 4 weeks

 Section D
 Food and Beverage Service 5 1 week
 Question 5

 TOTAL 75

 TIME 45-60 minutes

Criteria for setting a Marking Guideline
• The first page must contain: The name of the school; the date; name of the subject; grade; time allocation;
 name and number of the SBA task; mark total; name of the examiner and moderator.
• All marking guidelines must be neatly typed.
• No spelling, language or translation errors are allowed.
• The numbering format must be correct and the numbering must align accurately with the question paper.
• Indicate the mark allocation for each fact with a tick .
• Include all the alternative responses that are considered as correct answers on the Marking Guideline.

 100
 4.4.2 Examinations

Each question paper must cater for a balanced range of cognitive levels as well as align to the prescribed range
for levels of difficulty. The mark allocation to weight the content for the Trial and November examination papers in
all grades are indicated in the table that follows.

 Grade 12 Trial Examination and November NSC Examination Marks

 Content Grade 12

 Sectio A Short questions (all topics)
 n 40
 Compulsory: Include a variety of question types
 Question
 1Section B Kitchen and Restaurant operations
 Question Hygiene 20
 2
 Safety and Security

 Section C Nutrition and Menu planning
 Question 3: Foo Commodities 80 (2x40)
 Question 4:

 Section D Sectors and Careers
 Question 5 Food and Beverage Service
 Question 6 60 (2x30)
 TOTAL 200

 TIME 3 hours

4.4.3 PRACTICAL WORK

(a) Practical lessons

Grade 12: Learners must each do a minimum of six (6) assessed practical lessons and two (2) practical Skills Tests
during the year, in each of the first two terms.
Examples of dishes and skills for the assessed practical lessons are reflected in the Teaching plans for the Practical
work. Evidence of how marks are allocated for each Practical lesson according to the criteria stipulated in the
CAPS policy, must correlate accurately in both the teacher and learner evidence.

 101
 (b) Practical Skills Test

The Skills Test is an assessment task that requires the learner to demonstrate and apply understanding of: (a) Soft
Skills; (b) 21st Century skills, (c) Entrepreneurial Skills and (d) Practical techniques and skills.

Skill testing provides an objective measure of a candidate’s ability and understanding to perform a specific task.
A Skills Test measures skills or knowledge accurately. It further assists to determine whether the prescribed skills
have been mastered effectively.

The scenario provided to introduce the test can be presented to the learner in the following formats: (a)
written text; (b) visual text; (c) audio /video clip; (d) a practical demonstration or (e) a display.

Criteria for setting a Skills Test in Hospitality Studies
• Determine and indicate the skill/s to be assessed;
• Link the skill(s) to specific content within the Term’s ATP;
• Select / create a scenario that is current and real;
• Select / create the scenario relevant to the identified skill/s and content covered within the relevant Term;
• Provide information about the skill/s and/or content;
• Develop the task with clear instructions;
• Develop an assessment tool with a clear breakdown of expected criteria to display the competence of the
 skill.

(c) Practical Assessment Task (PAT)

• The Practical Assessment Task (PAT) comprises of ONE practical examination in Grade 12.
• Provincial Departments of Education may not set common menus for schools in the province, as the
 facilities, type of guests and the finances differ in each school.
• Set dates for the PAT in Grades 12 at the beginning of the academic year, to appear on the school year
 plan.
 These PATs should be planned to prevent clashes with other school activities.
• It is recommended that the PAT is included in the school’s timetable for examinations /tests.
• The duration for the PAT is: Grade 12: 5 – 7 hours
• Learners must work individually during the PAT.

 102
 • Each learner requires a mark out of 100 for cooking skills (Chef/Head chef/ Sous-Chef-/Kitchen Manager),
 OR a mark out of 100 for serving skills (Waiter/Maître d’hôtel/Beverage Manager). (Select the role for the
 PAT, based on the performance of the learner‘s strongest skill for either cooking or serving.)
• The school has the responsibility to provide the resources for the Practical Assessment Task (PAT).
• Grade 12: Guidelines for the Practical Assessment Task are set externally. No changes/amendment may
 be implemented to the expected outcomes as indicated in the PAT task for the current academic year.
 Provincial Departments of Education or teachers may not change or retype the PAT task for the current year
 or implement PAT tasks from a previous year of assessment.
• Grade 12: The practical examinations takes place in term 3. In consultation with the Subject Advisor the
 Grade 12 PAT may be implemented in term 2.
• The date for the PAT in Grade 12 (Term 3) should be discussed and negotiated well in advance with the
 Subject Advisor and/or Provincial Subject Head to attend the exam.

The following protective dress code is compulsory for every Practical lesson and the PAT:
 - Chefs should wear the correct chef uniform comprising of chef’s jacket, pants, hat, chef’s apron and school
 shoes to protect the learner. (Jeans and tackies are not allowed.) School uniform pants/trousers are
 permitted during practical lessons and PAT examinations. Hair must be kept away from the face using a hair
 net for hygiene purposes.
 - Waitrons wear school uniform / black pants/trousers and a white shirt with the option of a waistcoat/ bowtie
 or a waiter’s apron. Hair must be kept away from the face.
• Submission of completed written preparation forms for the practical lesson and PAT must be available in
 the learner evidence.
• The following must be available for each Practical lesson and PAT: (a) Clean dish cloths and oven
 gloves; (b) Dish washing liquid.

 Criteria for the PAT examination in Grade 12 (External guidelines) Term 2 or 3

 Formal meal – Hors d’oeuvres and three courses.
 Plated service.
 Include: Advanced meat dishes, exotic vegetable dishes, interesting starch dishes, advanced sauces, vegetarian
 dishes, choux pastry, desserts, yeast products (baked), gelatine (salad or dessert), advanced garnishing, serving
 of wine substitute and non-alcoholic cocktails.

 103
 17. Information Technology

 Grade 12 Programme of Assessment
Term Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4
Task Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Task 4 External Examination
Form / Types Theory Alternative Practical Practical Theory SBA Practical Theory Practical
of Test Task: Closed or Test Exam Exam Exam Exam Assessme
Assessment Open Book or nt Task
 Case Study or (PAT)
 Integrated task
Total Marks Min 50 Min 50 Min 50 150 150 Min 150 150 150
 750
Report Mark 50% 50% 100% 50% 50% 25% 25% 25% 25%
Weighting
SBA 17,5% 15% 17,5% 25% 25%
 100%
Weightings
Time 45 - 60 45 - 60 Minutes 45 - 60 3 Hours 3 Term 3 Hours 3 Hours Term 1 – 3
Allocation Minutes Minutes Hours 1–3

 There will be no June examination in Term 2.

 Alternative Assessment
 Alternative assessment is an alternative to standard tests and exams. It provides a true evaluation of what the
 learner has learned, going beyond acquired knowledge by looking at their application of this knowledge.

 Integrated task/test
 An integrated task/test requires learners to be able to apply their knowledge and skills in both theory and practical
 work that was covered. Testing these types of scenarios e.g. database theory together with database practical,
 algorithm with implementation and using a trace table to debug a programme.

 104
 Case study
Case studies are investigations of real-life situation or simulation thereof. Data is gathered from a variety of sources
and by using several different methods. A case study requires an in-depth, and detailed examination of a scenario,
as well as the related contextual conditions.
Each test, open book test, alternative assessment task and examination must reflect different cognitive levels.
Structure of Papers

Paper 1: 3-hour practical paper of 150 marks (25% of the total marks for the subject)
This will be a practically oriented paper covering questions on Solution Development.
IT learners will receive 30 minutes reading and planning time before commencement of the practical examination.
Learners will also receive a script to use for planning and notes during this period and the duration of the
examination.

To successfully complete this paper, each learner must have access to his or her own computer in the exam room.
Provision needs to be made for sufficient computers to enable the examination to be completed in 2 sittings.
This paper assesses the practical skills as well as the knowledge and understanding underlying the skills pertaining
to Solution Development, i.e. the high-level programming language studied which includes interaction with a
database.

The paper does not have an overarching scenario. Each question may have its own scenario.
The paper will comprise questions covering the following broad topics:
 Basic programming skills
 Database:
 o Integrated SQL solution that will also include problem-solving as part of the solution
 o Integrated data-aware that will also include problem-solving as part of the solution
 OOP-programming (including basic application and basic problem-solving skills)
 General problem solving – different levels of higher order skills
The following format to be used:
 Question Skills Tested Marks
 1 Basic, general programming concepts and skills ±40
 2 Database ±40
 3 Object-oriented programming (OOP) ±35
 4 General problem-solving ±35

 105
 Software design tools may be provided as part of the problem statement (IPO tables, basic flow charts and class
diagrams). The learner will not be required to enter large amounts of data. The required data could be retrieved
from the data disk or imported from documents such as a text file, or a database table. All GUIs will be provided.
Marks for questions must be allocated towards basic skills, concepts, constructs and problem-solving techniques,
e.g. application of an iteration structure as part of the solution (correct structure) as well as for the correct use of
the structure. The allocation of marks should take into account the time spent on solving, coding and debugging a
solution.

Paper 2: 3-hour written paper of 150 marks (25% of the total marks for the subject)

The paper will cover all theory aspects of all content, concepts and skills of topics, including elements of Solution
Development, e.g. algorithmic development, data structures, program design and general programming concepts
as well as generic problem-solving questions. The paper does not have an overarching scenario. Each question
may have its own scenario.

The following format to be used:
 Question Description
 Short questions (±20 marks)
 These topics could be integrated as part of the other sections and

 A range of short questions covering all topics that could include
 1
  multiple-choice and
 Human Computer Interaction and Social Implications

  modified true and false.
 Systems Technologies (±25 marks)
 2 Questions related to the content, concepts and skills in the Systems Technologies
 will not be a separate section in the paper.

 topic.
 Communications Technologies and Network Technologies (±25 marks)
 3 Questions related to the content, concepts and skills in the Communication
 Technologies and Network Technologies topic.
 Data and Information Management (±25 marks)
 4 Questions related to the management of data and the concept of information
 management.
 5 Solution Development (±25 marks)

 106
 Questions aligned to the Solution Development topic which assess the knowledge
 and understanding underlying the concepts and skills in the Solution Development
 topic.
 Integrated Scenario/Case Study (±30 marks)
 6
 This section is based on a single large-scale scenario and assess all the topics.

Software tools for examination purposes as part of the theory paper are limited to IPO tables, basic flow charts,
class diagrams, trace tables and use case diagrams.

Content to be covered
Assessment addresses the content as set out in this document. Due to the conceptual progression of the content
across the grades, content and skills from Grades 10 – 12 will be assessed in the external papers at the end of
Grade 12. Every three years’ content will be revisited to include new and emerging technologies and trends.

Cognitive and difficulty levels of formal assessments
Formal assessments must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners as shown in the table below:
 Cognitive Taxonomy Description
 Level
 Recall of factual/process knowledge in isolation, i.e. one action/step/set of basic
 C1 Knowledge,
 steps/instruction/process at a time, e.g. definitions in the theory paper and known
 30% Remembering
 procedure/algorithm in the practical paper.
 Demonstrates understanding of steps/algorithms/processes/ isolatable bits,
 such as translating from one form of representation to another, e.g. converting a
 C2 Understanding, flow chart representation of a program/program segment to a functional program.
 40% Applying It also requires using and combining known routines/algorithms/processes in
 a familiar context in order to complete a task, where all of the information
 required is immediately available to the learner.
 Requires reasoning/investigation/developing a plan or sequence of
 Analysing, steps/algorithm; has some complexity where candidates need to see how parts
 C3
 Evaluating, relate to a whole; organising/ putting together component parts/elements to form
 30%
 Creating a coherent functional whole/achieve an overall objective and completing a task
 that could have more than one possible approach.

 107
 It could also require weighing possibilities, deciding on the most appropriate
 solution, as well as testing to locate errors/ troubleshooting, pattern recognition
 and generalisation.

 These questions will comprise using and combining
 actions/strategies/procedures where candidates are required to create their own
 solutions to challenges they may encounter. These questions could include
 analysing questions or data, and decision-making.

Levels of difficulty are categorised as follows:
D1: Easy for the average Grade 12 candidate to answer
D2: Moderately challenging for the average Grade 12 candidate to answer
D3: Difficult for the average Grade 12 candidate to answer
D4: Very difficult for the average Grade 12 candidate to answer. The skills and knowledge required to answer
questions at this level should be included to distinguish amongst high achievers.

In judging the level of difficulty of each question, both the demands that each question makes on the cognitive
ability of an average Grade 12 IT learner and the intrinsic level of difficulty of the question or task are considered.
In making this judgement, the difficulty or ease of a particular question is identified. A four-category framework for
thinking about question or item difficulty adapted from Leong (2006) has been used in this identification process.
This framework comprises the following four general categories of difficulty:

 Content difficulty: This indexes the difficulty of the subject matter, topic or conceptual knowledge; some
 content is inherently more difficult than other content.
 Stimulus difficulty: This relates to the linguistic features of the question and the challenge that candidates
 face in reading, interpreting and understanding the question.
 Task difficulty: This refers to the difficulty that candidates face when trying to formulate or produce an answer.
 Expected response difficulty: This refers to difficulties because of the mark scheme or marking guidelines,
 in other words how marks are to be allocated.

Weighting of cognitive levels and difficulty levels
Papers 1 and 2 will include questions across three cognitive levels. The distribution of cognitive levels in the
practical and theory papers is given in the table below.
The estimated percentages for each level of difficulty within each cognitive level are shown in the table below.

 108
 D1 D2 D3 D4 TOTAL
 C1 ±10% ±10% ±10% - ±30%
 C2 ±15% ±15% ±8% ±2% ±40%
 C3 ±15% ±7% ±5% ±3% ±30%
 TOTAL ±40% ±32% ±23% ±5% 100%

Learners are required to investigate and analyse problems in a variety of contexts (such as scientific, technological,
environmental and everyday-life contexts) in order to solve the described problems effectively, either via
programming code in Paper 1 or describe proposed solutions in Paper/Paper 2.

 109
 ANNEXURE A
A TAXONOMY DESCRIPTION FOR PRACTICAL CONTENT
 Lower Order (C1) Middle Order (C2) Higher Order (C3)
 30% 40% 30%
 Knowledge/Remembering Understanding/applying Analysing/evaluating/creating
 Code Generator Program Generator Software Developer
 Operates at level of individual lines Operates at level of writing basic Operates at a level of writing solutions
 of code/code structures/ routine programs that combine to new/unfamiliar or open-ended
 procedures (in isolation) concepts/structures/ isolatable bits problems
 The learner is able to The learner is able to The learner is able to
 • recall specific isolatable bits of • read a program, tell what each line • tell what the different parts of a
 information learned means/ does program do and how different parts
 • use bits of code/code structures in • tell the goal/outcome of a program of a program work together
 isolation - no real connections – • write programs seen before in a • optimise a program/section of code
 in an unrelated way similar context/to perform specific • analyse, design, plan, implement
 • generate code - knows syntax and tasks and test a solution to a new problem
 semantics - can write a line of • Able to relate, combine and • Perform error catching,
 code/a code structure that does integrate some understanding when, where and
 something specific, e.g. basic concepts/code/code structures how
 processing statement, lines of into valid programs - use and • relate, combine and integrate
 code to obtain input or produce combine specific building blocks to several code structures/constructs
 output, algorithm to swop two write a program for a specific task to devise ‘new’ algorithms/ adapting
 items, etc. • Can answer closed/scaffolded existing ones
 • to focus on one relevant aspect at questions in a similar context than • link several aspects to a broader
 a time (uni-structural) experienced before, with or context
 • answer questions, seen before, without new elements • independently identify patterns and
 used in exactly same context as Cannot relate these to programming
 learned/classroom-based • Optimise a program/code constructs/structures
 exercise and that is straight • Do detailed planning • generalise, abstract and
 forward, to-the-point, that requires • Perform error catching/trace decompose problems into sub-
 mostly one, direct answer/piece of errors problems and modules
 code/code structure • answer free response/open-ended
 Cannot questions, ‘new’ (unseen

 110
 Lower Order (C1) Middle Order (C2) Higher Order (C3)
• See relationships • Answer unfamiliar, unseen or questions), by framing the question
• Combine concepts/various lines of open-ended questions without and finding a plausible cause of
 code/code structures to achieve a scaffolding and guidance action
 goal or complete a task
Examples of isolatable bits of Understanding: Synthesis
content learned (knowledge) that Convert from one format to another, Combine concepts in unfamiliar/new
the learner is able to recall and use e.g. interpret flow chart and convert context to form a (new coherent or
in isolation: to code, functional whole), e.g. code a solution
• syntax rule Read code and tell what it does or to a problem/to perform a task (not
• code statement, e.g. assign provide the output seen before)
 statement Applying: Includes analysing, e.g. identifying
• built-in method, e.g. random Carrying out or using a different parts such as sub-routines/
• structure, e.g. class definition procedure/algorithm/structure/ code modules/data structures / I/O
• algorithm, e.g. swap two values, statement in a given situation strategies /algorithms required;
 sort similar context (but new elements Includes evaluating, e.g. deciding
• process, e.g. reading a text file, or situation) as was experienced which structures to use and free
 populate array before to perform a task, e.g. response/open-ended questions
• setting property value combine concepts/isolatable bits

 111
 A NNEXURE B COMPONENTS/EVENTS/METHODS REQUIRED
112

 Component, Event, Method 10 11 12 Component, Event, 10 11 12 Component, 10 11 12
 Method Event, Method
 √ √ Show() √ √ Conversion /
 TForm √ √ Formatting
 √ √ √ √ IntToStr () / StrToInt √ √
 TPageControl √ Hide() √ () √
 √ √ √ √ FloatToStr () / √ √
 TButton √ Length() √ StrToFloat () √
 TBitButton √ √ √ setLength √ √ FloatToStrF () √ √ √
 √ √ √ DateTime √ √
 TLabel √ SetFocus() √ √ Functions
 TEdit √ √ √ IN operator √ √ √ FormatDateTime() √ √
 TImage √ √ √ Pos() √ √ TimeToStr() √ √
 TShape √ √ √ Copy() √ √ DateToStr() √ √
 Methods - Functions - Procedures

 Methods - Functions - Procedures
 TPanel √ √ √ Insert() √ √ DateTimeToStr() √ √
 TListBox √ √ √ Delete() √ √ StrToDate() √ √
 TRadioGroup √ √ √ Concat() √ √ StrToTime() √ √
 TComboBox √ √ √ AssignFile() √ √ Now() √ √
 TMemo √ √ √ Append () √ √ Date() √ √
 Components

 TRadioButton √ √ √ Reset() √ √ Time() √ √
 TCheckBox √ √ √ Rewrite() √ √ IsLeapYear() √ √
 √ √ √ Mathematical
 TSpinEdit √ CloseFile () √ Methods
 TRichEdit √ √ Ord() √ √ Random() √ √ √
 TTimer √ √ √ Chr() √ √ RandomRange() √ √
 TStringGrid √ √ Val() √ √ Round() √ √ √
 TDBGrid √ √ Str() √ √ Trunc() √ √ √
 TADOTable √ √ UpCase() √ √ √ Frac() √ √
 TADOQuery √ √ UpperCase() √ √ √ Ceil() √ √
 TDataSource √ √ LowerCase () √ √ Floor() √ √
 InputBox() √ √ √ IgnoreCase () √ √ Sqr() √ √ √
 ShowMessage() √ √ √ FileExists() √ √ Sqrt() √ √ √
 MessageDlg() √ √ √ Readln() √ √ Inc() √ √
 OnClick() √ √ √ Writeln() √ √ Dec() √ √
 OnCreate() √ √ √ LoadFromFile() √ PI √ √
 OnActivate() √ √ SaveToFile() √ Power() √ √
 OnShow() √ √
 OnClose() √ √
 Events

 OnTimer √ √ √
113
 18. Life Orientation

Programme of Assessment

The programme of assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in a subject throughout the school
year. The mark for each of the three formal assessment tasks for Life Orientation is as follows:
Programme of Assessment
The programme of assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in a subject throughout the school
year. The mark for each of the three formal assessment tasks for Life Orientation is as follows:
Grade 12

 TERM ASSESSMENT TASK MARKS PER TERM

 RECORDING REPORTING

 1 Source-based task 90 100

 PET 10

 2 Project 90 100

 PET 10

 3 Controlled test 100 100

 4 Final Examinations 100 100

 TOTAL 400 100

Formal assessment
In the formal programme of assessment for Life Orientation, learners are expected to complete five tasks.
The five assessment tasks are:
• Source-based
• Project
• Controlled test
• National Senior Certificate Examination
• Physical Education Task (PET)

 114
 Examinations
Various type of questions should be incorporated and focus primarily on the application of knowledge in an
integrated manner.
The Grade 12 Life Orientation examination questions may cover 10% of the content from Grades 10 and 11 CAPS.
Marking should be done centrally.

Outline of the Examinations for Grade 12

The paper will consist of three sections.

Total for examination: 100 mark

 Section A: 20 marks Section B: 40 marks Section C: 40 marks

 All questions are All questions are COMPULSORY Learners will answer TWO 20-mark
 COMPULSORY questions out of THREE

  A short source may be used  Learners will answer TWO 20-  Questions will predominantly focus on
 to contextualise some of mark questions. Short open- the application of knowledge and skills
 the questions ended questions could be:  A short text/diagram/
 o Scenario based data/graphs/cartoons can be provided
  The questions must o Source-based as a stimulus
 include a combination of o Case study  Questions will predominantly focus on
 THREE or more types of o Cartoons the application of knowledge and skills
 questions from the list o Illustration  Learners will be required to:
 below: o Graphs o Explain/examine/
  Questions should be knowledge- analyse/evaluate/critically discuss a
 o Multiple choice based, from information topic.
 o One-word responses learners have acquired from the o Make decisions and give advice
 (list, state, provide, Life Orientation content in the o Provide recommendations
 give) FET band. o Make conclusions.
 o Definitions o Solve problems
 o Short explanations  Learners should display, present
 (why, how, describe, and apply knowledge and skills  Learners should provide responses
 explain discuss) gained from the Life Orientation through extended writing of descriptive
 content. paragraphs or short essays.

 115
  Questions should test
 understanding and factual
 knowledge
  Responses should be
 short, direct
  Mark allocation for the
 questions should range
 between 1 – 2 mark

 Note. Information provided in the texts has to be current, up-to-date, age-appropriate, learner-friendly and
 devoid of racial, cultural, religious, sexual orientation and gender bias. Each section will include questions at
 lower, middle and higher cognitive levels.

 A marking guideline and a marking grid indicating the cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy levels 1-6 must be
 provided.

 Weighting Cognitive level Bloom’s taxonomy

 30% lower order Levels 1 & 2

 40% middle order Levels 3 & 4

 30% higher order Levels 5 & 6

 The time allocation for the examination is at least 2 hours

Source-based task
The source-based task must be completed independently under controlled conditions. The teacher is required to
facilitate the process. However, the completion of the task should not be administered as a class test.

Sources may be taken from newspaper articles, magazine articles, websites video clips or radio recordings. All
sources must be acknowledged. Through these sources, learners are presented with a real-life situation, a current
problem or an incident relating to a topic in the curriculum. They are expected to assume a particular role in
articulating the position, and respond to particular questions from various cognitive orders. They should draw on
their own experience or prior learning to interpret, analyze, give advice, and make suggestion/s or
recommendation/s to defend arguments and/or solve the problem based on informed decision-making.

 116
 Information provided in the sources must be current, up-to-date, grade and age-appropriate, learner-friendly and
devoid of racial, cultural, religious, sexual orientation and gender bias. The sources selected should have direct links
with the Life Orientation content in the CAPS.
The source based task must include questions at lower, middle and higher cognitive levels. The following must be
provided: A marking memorandum or marking guideline with an exhaustive list of possible alternate answers to
assess learners. A marking grid indicating the cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy levels 1-6 must be provided.
There must be a distribution of marks reflecting 30% low order, 40% middle order and 30% high order.
Project

Learners will spend time outside of contact time to collect resources and information, however the completion of
the task has to be facilitated by the teacher in class time. The project will be a task in which learners will demonstrate
knowledge, skills, values and competencies in specific or integrated content. The project requires extended reading
and writing on the part of the learner.

Teachers should give the necessary guidance prior to commencement and during completion of the project and
monitor the progress of learners throughout. The objective for the project should be clear and thorough planning
should take place, e.g. preparing the questions for an interview. The topic and nature of the project will be
determined by the content covered according to the annual teaching plan.

Learners will need adequate guidance at the outset of the project and progress should be monitored throughout
the process. All assessment criteria applicable to the project has to be discussed with the learners prior to the
commencement of the project
When preparing a project, consider these minimum requirements.
 Choose a relevant topic
 The project will involve thorough investigation into sourcing information on the selected content from the
 curriculum.
 The project could take the form of interviews, surveys, observations etc.
 The objective /purpose/ reasons for the project should be clear.
 Thorough planning should take place e.g.
 - Brainstorm the topic.
 - Draw a mind map outlining the project.
 - Prepare questions for the interview.
 Research the content.
 Analyse and collate data/information.
 The findings should be structured in the form of an essay with sub-headings.
 The project may be supplemented with the following:

 117
 - Compiling brochures
 - Writing newspaper/ magazine articles, advertisements
 - Pictures, photos
 - Making videos
 - Drawing / taking / selecting relevant pictures
 - Preparing a presentation or a wall chart
 A conclusion and/ or recommendations/ suggestions / solutions / advice / practical strategies should be
 provided.
 Reflection: How did the project/participation affect your thinking, attitude or behaviour regarding the issue?
 Include a bibliography where the titles of books, articles, websites and the other sources of information
 consulted are listed.
 The project must have a cover page and table of contents.
 The project should be bound or stapled.

NB: A marking guideline, should be provided. Provision must be made for additional answers as well as the learners’ own
interpretation of the questions. Constructive feedback should be provided to learners upon completion of assessment.
The guideline for marking could be a memorandum, rubric, matrix, criteria checklist etc.
A marking grid indicating the cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy levels 1-6 must be provided. There must be a
distribution of marks reflecting 30% low order, 40% middle order and 30% high order.

Physical Education Task (PET)
The Physical Education (PE) component aims to develop learners’ physical well-being and knowledge of movement and
safety. It encourages learners to perform in a wide range of activities associated with the development of an active and
healthy lifestyle. PE also aims to develop learners’ confidence and generic skills, especially those of collaboration,
communication, creativity, critical thinking and aesthetic appreciation. These, together with the nurturing of positive
values and attitudes in physical education, provide a good foundation for learners’ lifelong and life-wide learning.
All Physical Education periods will focus on practical physical and mass participation in movement activities:
  For enjoyment and enrichment purposes,
  To encourage learners to commit and engage in regular physical activity as part of their lifestyle.
PET will be assessed in the first and second terms only.

Physical Education component should comprise of three different movement sections: fitness, games and sport; and
recreation. Learners are expected to participate in Physical Education, which is a fixed period, labelled Physical Education
on the school timetable.

The focus of PET falls into two broad categories:

 118
 1) Participation: exposing learners to an understanding of the value of regular participation in physical activity.
 Participation should encourage further development, enjoyment and build confidence

 2) Movement performance: learners will be assessed at the level at which they are capable of performing.
 Movement performance must not encourage a sense of competition.

 LEVEL LIMITED ADEQUATE PROFICIENT EXCELLENT

 Observation 1 Needs significant Requires attention Efficient, effective Exceptional level of
 Outcome of attention: and refinement: and appropriate: skill: movements
 movement movements do not lapses in movements movements mostly always produce the
 performance produce the desired which do not always produce the correct desired outcome
 outcome at all. produce the desired desired outcome
 outcome

 (5 marks) (0-1 mark) (2-3 marks) (4 marks) (5 marks)

 Observation 2 Needs significant Requires attention Efficient, effective Exceptional level of
 Outcome of attention: and refinement: and appropriate: skill: movements
 movement movements do not lapses in movements movements mostly always produce the
 performance produce the desired which do not always produce the correct desired outcome
 outcome at all produce the desired desired outcome
 outcome

 (5 marks) (0-1 mark) (2-3 marks) (4 marks) (5 marks)

A Physical Education class list, for will be used to generate a mark out of 10 for movement performance.
The number of PE periods per term will depend on the Department of Basic Education school calendar for the year.

 TERM 1 1. Frequency of participation 2. Movement performance Total marks for
 No marks allocated (10 marks) term

 Observation Observation
 Learners’
 P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 1 2 10
 Names
 5 marks 5 marks

1. Caroline    a x 
 Maju [present] [absent] [present but
 did not
 participate]

 119
 An ‘a’ will indicate that the learner was absent for that particular period and an ‘x’ that the learner was
present in class, but did not participate.

Physical Education Activity
A Physical Education class list, for Grades 10-12, will be used to generate a mark out of 10 for movement
performance.
The number of PE periods per term will depend on the Department of Basic Education school calendar for the year.
Frequency of Participation
A record of learner participation will be kept in the teacher file. This will not be used for assessment.

Movement performance
Learners will be observed twice during terms 1 and 2 for formal assessment purposes to determine their level of
movement performance.
Allocate a mark out of five (5) for each of the two observations (movement performance). Add the two to obtain a
final mark of ten (10).

 120
 19. Life Sciences

AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 4

Assessment
4.1 Introduction

Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information on learners’ performance, using
various forms of assessment. It involves four steps: generating and collecting evidence of achievement; evaluating this evidence,
recording the findings and using this information to understand and thereby assist the learners’ development in order to improve
the process of learning and teaching.

Assessment should be both informal/formative (Assessment for Learning) and formal/summative (Assessment of Learning). In
both cases, regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance their learning experience.

Assessment is a process that measures individual learners’ attainment of knowledge (content, concepts and skills) in a subject by
collecting, analysing and interpreting the data and information obtained from this process to:

• enable the teacher to make reliable judgements about a learner’s progress;
• inform learners about their strengths, weaknesses and progress; and
• assist teachers, parents and other stakeholders in making decisions about the learning process and the progress of the
 learners. Assessment should be mapped against the content and intended aims specified for Life Sciences and in
 informal/formative and formal/summative assessments it is important to ensure that in the course of the year:

• all of the subject content is covered;
• the full range of skills is included; and
• different forms of assessment are used.

4.2 Informal (formative) assessment or daily assessment

Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on learners’ achievement that can be used to
improve their learning. Informal assessment is daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations, discussions,
practical work, learner-teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, homework, informal tests, etc. Informal assessment should be
used to provide feedback to the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but it need not be recorded.

It should not be seen as separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom.
  A minimum of three informal tasks should be done per week. These tasks can be marked by learners or teachers.
  It is recommended that a consolidation task is completed at the end of a concept/topic.
  It is vital that practical skills are taught and assessed in an integrated way in the context of theoretical concepts;

 121
 therefore, the investigations listed in Section 3 must be part of daily teaching and learning.
  Collectively, the informal tasks must reflect all degrees of difficulty and cognitive levels.

Informal, ongoing assessments should be used to structure the acquisition of knowledge and skills and should be a precursor to
formal tasks in the Programme of Assessment.

The results of daily assessment tasks are not taken into account for promotion or certification purposes.

4.3 Formal (summative) assessment
 Grades Formal school-basedEnd-of-year examinations
 assessments
 12 25% including trial External examination: 75%
 examinations

All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as formal assessment. Formal
assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and certification purposes. All formal
assessment tasks are subject to moderation to ensure that appropriate standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a grade and
in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, practical tasks, projects, assignments,
demonstrations, oral presentations and performances. Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal Programme of
Assessment in each grade and subject.

Assessment in Life Sciences must cater for a range of cognitive levels, degrees of difficulty and abilities of learners. The subject
content, specific aims and range of skills should be used to inform the planning and development of assessment tasks.

4.3.1. Degrees of difficulty for examination/test questions
 30% 40% 25% 5%
 Easy for the average learner Moderately challenging for Difficult for the average Very difficult for the average
 to answer. the average learner to learner to answer. learner to answer. The skills
 answer. and knowledge required to
 answer the question allows
 for level 7 learners (extremely
 high-achieving/ability
 learners) to be discriminated
 from other high
 ability/proficiency learners.

 122
 Other factors besides the type of cognitive demand affect the degree of difficulty of examination/test questions. We know
this because questions that align to a particular type of cognitive demand are not always as difficult as other questions that align
to the same cognitive demand. For example:

  a recall question that asks students to recall an abstract theory, or complex content is often much more difficult to
 accomplish than one which asks candidates to recall a simple fact (i.e. differences in content difficulty).
  a question that requires recalling an ordered sequence of events and which entails writing a few sentences is generally
 easier than one which involves the same type of cognitive demand but entails writing a whole essay (i.e. differences in
 ‘writing difficulty’).
  literal comprehension of source material comprising a simple contemporary magazine article is generally easier than
 literal comprehension of a classical work because of differences in the content, vocabulary, sentence and organisational
 structure, register, diction, literary techniques, abstractness of ideas and imagery, and background knowledge required
 (i.e. differences in ‘reading difficulty’).

In addition to identifying the type of cognitive demand made in each examination/test question, examiners are asked to use
their knowledge of the subject, their experience of teaching it and marking and/or moderation experience to make judgments
about whether each examination/test question is easy, moderately difficult, difficult, or very difficult for the average learner in the
grade.

To judge the level of difficulty of each examination/test question, you need to consider both the demands that each question
makes on the cognitive schema of an average learner and the intrinsic difficulty of the question or task. To make this judgment,
you need to identify where the difficulty or ease in a particular question resides.

The framework for thinking about question or item difficulty comprises the following four general categories of difficulty:

  Content (topic/concept) difficulty;
  Stimulus (question and source material) difficulty;
  Task (process) difficulty; and
  Expected response (memo) difficulty.

 123
 Framework for thinking about question difficulty

 Content/concept difficulty Stimulus difficulty Task difficulty Expected response difficulty

 Content/concept difficulty Stimulus difficulty refers to Task difficulty refers to Expected response difficulty
 indexes the difficulty in the the difficulty of the linguistic the difficulty that refers to difficulty imposed by
 subject matter, topic or features of the question candidates confront examiners in a mark scheme and
 conceptual knowledge (linguistic complexity) and the when they try to memorandum. This location of
 assessed or required. In this challenge that candidates face formulate or produce difficulty is more applicable to
 judgment of the item/question, when they attempt to read, an answer. ‘constructed’ response questions,
 difficulty exists in the academic interpret and understand the as opposed to ‘selected’ response
 and conceptual demands that words and phrases in the questions (such as multiple
 questions make and/or the grade question AND when they choice, matching/true-false).
 level boundaries of the various attempt to read and
 ‘elements’ of domain/subject understand the information or
 knowledge (topics, facts, ‘text’ or source material
 concepts, principles and (diagrams, tables and
 procedures associated with the graphs, pictures, cartoons,
 subject). passages, etc.) that
 accompanies the question.

Examiners should analyse the items in their papers to ensure the paper is not too easy or too difficult even if the cognitive demand of
the paper is according to the standard.

 124
 4.3.2. Weighting of Cognitive levels for the assessment of content in Grades 12

 Knowing science Understanding science Applying scientific Evaluating, analysing and
 knowledge synthesising
 scientific knowledge
 40% 25% 20% 15%
 To recall or recognise To communicate understanding of a To use, perform or Analyse complex information
 explicit information, Life Sciences concept, idea, follow a basic/ To adapt a variety of appropriate
 details, facts, formulas, explanation, model, or theory, for standard/ routine strategies to solve novel/ non-
 terms, definitions, example to: procedure/rule/met routine/complex/ open-ended
 procedures, Interpret: change from one form of hod/ operation. problems. To apply multi-step
 representations from representation to another (e.g. procedures.
 memory or from pictures to words; words to pictures; To use/apply
 material provided. numbers to words, words to numbers, understanding of Evaluate
 pictures to numbers) Life Sciences To evaluate or make critical
 concepts, facts or judgement (for example, on qualities
 Exemplify: Find a specific example or details from a known of accuracy, consistency,
 illustration of a concept or principle context to an acceptability, desirability, worth or
 unfamiliar context. probability) using background
 Classify: Determine that something knowledge of the subject.
 belongs to a category. Judge, critique

 Summarize: Abstract a general theme Create a new product
 or major points. To integrate life sciences concepts,
 principles, ideas and information,
 Infer: Draw a logical conclusion from make connections and relate parts of
 presented information. material, ideas, information or
 operations to one another and to an
 Compare: Detect similarities and overall structure or purpose.
 differences between two objects or
 concepts.

 Explain why: create a cause-and-
 effect model of a system or concept.

 125
 4.3.3. The instructional verbs used in examination/test questions

 Verb Explanation
 Analyse Separate, examine and interpret
 Calculate This means a numerical answer is required – in general, you should show your working, especially
 where two or more steps are involved
 Classify Group things based on common characteristics
 Compare Point out or show both similarities and differences between things, concepts or phenomena
 Contrast Compare two or more things to show the differences between them
 Define Give a clear meaning
 Describe State in words (using diagrams where appropriate) the main points of a
 structure/process/phenomenon/investigation
 Determine To calculate something, or to discover the answer by examining evidence
 Differentiate Use differences to qualify categories
 Discuss Consider all information and reach a conclusion
 Explain Express your answer in cause-effect or statement and reason sequence
 Identify Name the essential characteristics
 Label Identify on a diagram or drawing
 List Write a list of items, with no additional detail
 Mention Refer to relevant points
 Name Give the name (proper noun) of something
 State Write down information without discussion
 Suggest Offer an explanation or a solution
 Tabulate Draw a table and indicate the answers as direct pairs

 126
 4.4 Assessment requirements for Life sciences:

4.4.1 Grade 12 Programme of formal assessment

The requirements (number and nature of tasks) for Life Sciences are indicated below:

Composition of the SBA component for Grade 12
 TERM Task Weighting % of Reporting mark
 (% of SBA) per term
 1 Practical 10 25
 Minimum 30 marks
 Test 15 75
 Minimum 50 marks
 2 Practical 10 50
 Minimum 30 marks
 Test 15 50
 Minimum 50 marks
 3 Assignment 20 25
 Minimum 50 marks
 Duration: 1 - 1½ hours
 Trial Exam 30 75
 Two papers - 150 marks each
 Duration: 2½ hours each
 Total 100

NOTE:
  The year mark for grade 12 will be converted to 25% and the external examination will count 75% of the final mark.
  The assignment can be done in any term (1-3) but must be recorded in term 3.
  The final SBA mark is weighted as follows:
 o Test and examinations: 60%
 o Practical tasks and assignment/ project: 40%

4.5 Further elaboration on the different tasks of the Programme of Formal Assessment:

 127
 4.5.1 Tests and Examinations

When designing the tests as well as the trial examinations, the Life Sciences teacher must ensure that:

 The test is a minimum of 50 marks
 The test must cover the content taught in the respective term
 The trial examinations for grade 12 must cover work completed in terms 1, 2 and 3
 Tests and examinations are balanced in terms of cognitive levels and topic weightings. Degrees of difficulty must be
 determined. In this regard weighting grids must be used
 Tests and examinations follow the NSC examination in its design, rigour and format
 In tests and examinations, one minute is allocated for each mark
 Each test/exam paper must cover all the SAs and the minimum weighting for SA2 is 20% of the total of the paper.
 Tests and examinations must be analysed diagnostically and appropriate remedial and intervention strategies are instituted

4.5.2 Practical Tasks

When designing the practical tasks, the Life Sciences teacher must ensure that:
  At least ONE of the practical tasks include manipulation of apparatus and/or collection of data
  All 7 SA2 skills must be covered over the total number of practical tasks required for the year
  Each of the practical tasks must assess at least 3 of the 7 skills
  A minimum of 30 marks is allocated to a practical task

4.5.3 Research Project

Teachers can either choose the topic or allow learners to do so, provided that the project adheres to the criteria stipulated on the
next page.

The teacher may choose to administer the project in either grade 10 or 11, provided the topic fits the scope of that grade.
When designing the research project, the Life Sciences teacher must ensure
that:
 The research project covers Specific Aims 1, 2 and 3
 The mark for the research project is recorded in the 3rd term even if it is completed in term 1 or term 2
 A minimum of 50 marks is allocated to the research project
 It is a long term task (at least 3-weeks of non-contact time)
 It is an investigative task
 It focuses on the accessing of knowledge through literature research as well as through primary sources such as people

 128
  It includes sub-skills such as:
  Formulating investigative questions and hypotheses
  Gathering information from a variety of sources
  Manipulating and processing information
  Analysing information
  Identifying patterns
  Evaluating data
  Drawing valid conclusions
  Communicating findings

4.5.4 Assignment

When designing the assignment, the Life Sciences teacher must ensure that:
  The task should be set in such a way that it is not heavily weighted towards recall of content. It should be more skills-
 based
  The assignment covers Specific Aims 1, 2 and 3
  The SA2 skills not assessed in the grade 12 practical tasks throughout the year, must be addressed within the assignment
  The mark for the assignment is recorded in the 3rd term even if it is completed in term 1 or term 2
  A minimum of 50 marks is allocated to the assignment
  It is a short term task (1 - 1 ½ hours)
  It is individually completed at school under controlled conditions
  No resources (e.g. text books, notes, internet, etc.) may be used when completing the task
  It includes a short source-based essay (10-15 marks) and also as many as possible of the following:
  Analysing and interpreting data
  Making drawings
  Plotting graphs
  Drawing tables
  Performing calculations
  Justifying conclusions
4.6 Format of a Life Sciences examination paper

The one paper will be:
 Sections Type of questions Marks

 A A variety of short answer questions, objective questions for example MCQ, 50
 Terminology, columns/ statement and items, data-response

 B A variety of questions types. 2 x 50
 2 questions of 50 marks each divided into 2 – 4 subsections

 129
 4.7 The end-of-year examinations:

4.7.1 Grade 12

The examination wi consist of two examination papers of 2½ hours and 150 marks each. The weighting and assessment of topics in Paper
1 and Paper 2 will be as follows:

Paper 1
 Topic Time Weighting
 % Marks
 Term 1:
 Reproduction in Vertebrates ½ week 5 8

 Human Reproduction 3 weeks 27 41
 Term 2:
 Responding to the environment (humans) 4 weeks 36 54
 Term 3:
 Responding to the Environment (plants) 1 week 9 13
 Term 2 and 3:
 Endocrine and Homeostasis 2½ weeks 23 34
 Totals 11 weeks 100 150

Paper 2
 Topic Time Weighting
 % Marks
 Term 1: 2 weeks 18 27
 DNA: Code of Life
 Meiosis 1½ weeks 14 21
 Term 1 and 2:
 Genetics and Inheritance 3½ weeks 32 48
 Term 3:
 Evolution 4 weeks 36 54
 Totals 11 weeks 100 150

The weighting per topic must serve only as a guideline to teachers and examiners and is included to ensure that all topics are
adequately covered in examinations. The number of marks per topic is not expected to be exactly according to this weighting
in the examination papers.

 130
 4.8 Recording and reporting

Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment task. It
indicates learner progress towards the achievement of knowledge as prescribed in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy
Statement. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual progression within a grade and
her or his readiness to progress or be promoted to the next grade. Records of learner performance should also be used to verify
the progress made by teachers and learners during the teaching and learning process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other stakeholders. Learner
performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’ meetings, school visitation days,
parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters, etc. For all grades, teachers report learners’
achievements in percentages next to the appropriate subject. The various achievement levels and their corresponding
percentage bands are as shown in the table below.

Note: The seven-point scale should have clear descriptions that give detailed information for each level. Teachers will record
actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages against the subject on the learners’ report cards.

Codes and Percentages for reporting in Grades R-12

 Rating code Description of competence Percentage
 7 Outstanding achievement 80- 100
 6 Meritorious achievement 70 - 79
 5 Substantial achievement 60 - 69
 4 Adequate achievement 50 - 59
 3 Moderate achievement 40 - 49
 2 Elementary achievement 30 - 39
 1 Not achieved 0 - 29

Schools are required to provide quarterly feedback to parents on the Programme of Assessment using a formal reporting tool
such as a report card. The schedule and the report card should indicate the overall level of a learners’ performance.

4.9 Moderation of assessment

Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should be
implemented at school and district level and if necessary also at provincial level. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation
practices must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

 131
 4.9.1 Grades 12

Moderation refers to the process which ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should be
implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation practices must be in
place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments. Moderation serves five purposes:
• Firstly, it should ascertain whether the subject-specific content and skills are sufficiently covered.
• Secondly, the moderator must ensure that the various levels of cognitive demand are reflected in the assessments.
• Thirdly, that the assessments and marking are of an acceptable standard and consistency.
• Fourthly, to ensure that assessment in different schools are more or less comparable whilst recognising that different
 teachers have different standards.
• Finally, to identify areas in which the teacher may need further support and development and to provide such necessary
 support

Moderation can take place at four levels:

• School-based moderation and verification of learner performance

This is intended to ensure that the assessments meet the requirements in terms of content, cognitive demands and skills; that
the marking has been consistent and fair and that the marks are a true reflection of learners’ performance in the assessments.
This will enable the school to easily identify problems related to the pacing, standard and reliability of assessment and to ensure
that appropriate interventions are put in place early. This is an ongoing process.

• Moderation by the subject advisor/teacher moderator/district

This is also an ongoing process. Subject advisors/teacher moderators/districts should moderate assessments, to ascertain
whether:

 o Subject-specific content and skills have been covered adequately;
 o The prescribed number of assessments has been complied with;
 o The appropriate cognitive demands are reflected in the assessments;
 o The marking is of an acceptable standard and is consistent;
 o The assessments in different schools are comparable whilst recognising that different teachers teach and assess
 differently.

Subject advisors should provide teachers with the necessary guidance and support should any shortcomings be identified.
Early identification of shortcomings and early interventions are essential.

 132
 It is therefore necessary that moderation at this level should be ongoing and not be a once-off end-of-year event.

• Moderation by the province
Moderation of SBA at this level is once-off and is related to the quality assurance processes that are necessary developed
jointly by the Department of Basic Education and Umalusi in terms of National Policy.

• At a National level
Statistical moderation of learner performance in the School Based Assessment is necessary to ensure comparability across schools,
districts, and provinces.

4.10 General

This document should be read in conjunction with:

4.10.1 National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12;
and

4.10.2 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12.

 133
 20. Mathematical Literacy

4.1 Programme of Assessment

The following tables provide the Programme of Assessment for Grades 12 showing the weighting of assessment tasks
Table 1: The weighting of assessment tasks

Example of a Programme of Assessment for Grade 12 showing the weighting of assessment tasks
 SCHOOL BASED ASSESSMENT (25%) EXAMINATION
 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4 (75%)
 Investigation Assignment Test
 (10%) (10%) (15%)
 Grade 12 REVISION Examination
 Test Examination*
 (15%) (25%)

The suggested Programme of Assessment assumes that:
• all the topics and sections are addressed throughout the year;
• the topics are weighted in accordance with the suggested minimum weightings for each topic outlined in Chapter 2 of this
 document;
• content and/or skills are integrated across a variety of topics throughout teaching and learning, and in the assessment
 activities.
• 1-2 weeks may be allocated as duration to complete and submit the Assignment or Investigation.
• The weightings for quarterly reporting will be allocated as 25% assignment or investigation and 75% control test or
 examination.

THE STRUCTURE OF THE PAPERS

Table 2: Weighting per application topic:

 Topic Weighting (%)

 Interpreting and communicating answers and calculations No weighting is provided for these
 Basic Skills topics. Rather, they will be assessed in
 Numbers and calculations with numbers
 Topics an integrated way in the Application
 Patterns, relationships and representations
 Topics on both papers.

 TOPIC PAPER 1 WEIGHTING

 Finance 60% (± 5)

 134
 Application Data Handling 35% (± 5)
 topics
 Probability 5%

 TOPIC PAPER 2 WEIGHTING

 Maps, plans and other representation of the physical world 40% (± 5)
 Application
 Measurement 55% (± 5)
 topics
 Probability 5%

 N.B. The policy caters for the variance of ± 5% for each topic except probability.
  Section in Finance: (Income, Expenditure, Profit/loss, Income-and-Expenditure statements and Budgets, Cost
 price and Selling price) can be included in Paper 2 where there is direct link to Measurement and Maps and Plans.
  Growth Charts (CAPS page 65) can be examined in Data Handling in Paper 1, as it assesses application of
 measures of spread.

Table 3: Percentage of marks to be allocated to the different assessment taxonomy levels in examinations in Grades 12

 The four levels of the Mathematical Literacy assessment taxonomy Paper 1 Paper 2

 Level 1: Knowing 30% ± 5% 30% ± 5%

 Level 2: Applying routine procedures in familiar contexts 30% ± 5% 30% ± 5%

 Level 3: Applying multi-step procedures in a variety of contexts 20% ± 5% 20% ± 5%

 Level 4: Reasoning and reflecting 20% ± 5% 20% ± 5%

The first question in paper 1 end of year exam should integrate content from Finance and Data handling such that all the questions
are pitched at cognitive level 1. The question should carry 20%, with ± 5% permissible deviation.
The same format should also be applied in paper 2.

i.e The first question in paper 2 end of year exam should integrate content from Measurement and Maps, plans and other
representation of the physical world such that all the questions are pitched at cognitive level 1. The question should carry 20%,
with ± 5% permissible deviation.

 135
 21. Mathematics

Programme of Assessment

(a) Examinations

In Grades 10, 11 and 12, 25% of the final promotion mark is a year mark and 75% is an examination mark. All assessments in
Grade 10 and 11 are internal while in Grade 12 the 25%-year mark assessment is internally set and marked but externally
moderated and the 75% examination is externally set, marked and moderated.

 Mark distribution for Mathematics NCS end-of-year papers: Grades 10-12

 Paper 1: Grades 12: bookwork: maximum 6 marks

 description Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade. 12

 Algebra and equations (and inequalities) 30 ± 3 45 ± 3 25 ± 3

 Patterns and sequences 15 ± 3 25 ± 3 25 ± 3

 Finance and growth 10 ± 3

 Finance, growth and decay 15 ± 3 15 ± 3

 Functions and graphs 30 ± 3 45 ± 3 35 ± 3

 Differential Calculus 35 ± 3

 Probability 15 ± 3 20 ± 3 15 ± 3

 Total 100 150 150

 Paper 2: Grades 11 and 12: theorems and/or trigonometric proofs: maximum 12 marks

 description Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12

 Statistics 15 ± 3 20 ± 3 20 ± 3

 Analytical Geometry 15 ± 3 30 ± 3 40 ± 3

 Trigonometry 40 ± 3 50 ± 3 50 ± 3

 Euclidean Geometry and Measurement 30 ± 3 50 ± 3 40 ± 3

 Total 100 150 150

 136
 note:
 • Modelling as a process should be included in all papers, thus contextual questions can be set on any topic.
 • Questions will not necessarily be compartmentalised in sections, as this table indicates. Various topics can be integrated in
 the same question.

(b) Number of assessment tasks and Weighting:

Learners are expected to have seven (7) formal assessment tasks for their school-based assessment in grades 10 and 11 and
six (6) in grade 12. The number of tasks and their weighting are listed below:

 GRADE 10 GRADE 11 GRADE 12

 WEIGHT WEIGHT WEIGHT
 TASKS TASKS TASKS
 (%) (%) (%)

 Project 15 Project / 15 Test 10
 /investigation investigation Project /
 Term 1
 Test 10 Test 10 investigation 15
 Assignment 15

 Assignment 15 Assignment 15 Test 10
 Term 2
 Test 10 Test 10

 Test 10 Test 10 Test 10
 Term 3
 Test 10 Test 10 Trial Examination 25

 Term 4 Test 10 Test 10

 School-based Assessment mark 80 80 85

 School-based Assessment mark (as
 25% 25% 25%
 % of promotion mark)

 End-of-year Examinations 75% 75%

 Promotion mark 100% 100%

 137
 Note:
• Although the project/investigation is indicated in the first term, it could be scheduled in term 2. Only one project/ investigation
 should be set per year.
• Tests should be at least one hour long and count at least 50 marks.
• Project or investigation must contribute 25% of term 1 marks while the test marks contribute 75% of the term 1 marks.
• The combination (25% and 75%) of the marks must appear in the learner’s report.
• Non graphic and non programmable calculators are allowed. Calculators should only be used to perform standard numerical
 computations and to verify calculations by hand.
• Formula sheet must not be provided for tests but must be provided the final examinations in Grades 10 and 11.

 138
 22. Mechanical Technology – Fitting and Machining, Automotive and
 Welding and Metalwork

4.5 Assessment

4.5.1 Programme of Assessment

The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout a term.
Without this programme, assignments and tasks are crowded into the last few weeks of the term creating unfair pressure on the
learners

 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT

 School–based Assessment Practical Assessment Task
 SBA PAT Final Examination

 25% 25% 50%

The table below shows the compilation of the school based assessment mark:
 Description Time Frame Marks

 Assignment Term1 50

 PAT Simulation Term2 200

 Preparatory examination Term3 200

 Total 450

The following is the Programme of Assessment for Grades 12.
 GRADE 12 ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS

 % OF FINAL PROMOTION MARK
 ASSESSMENT TASKS TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4

 Assignment 1 5

 PAT Simulation 25
 1 20

 Preparatory examination 1

 Practical Assessment Task
 25
 (PAT)

 Final examination 1 50

 TOTAL – PROMOTION MARK

4.5.2 Assignment

 139
 • An assignment must be in the form of a written work which may include the following; Research, Case study, Drawings
 and Calculations.
• It should cover term1 content and the duration should be 60 minutes.
• The mark allocation should be 50 marks
• Each Assignment must cater for a range of cognitive levels or skills.
• The forms of Assessment used should be Grade and development level appropriate.
• The design of these tasks should cover the content and context

4.5.3 Examinations

• Each examination must cater for a range of cognitive levels
• There is no June Examination in Mechanical Technology

• A Formal Prescribed Simulation will be Assesed in June

• The mark allocation of the three –hour Preparatory examination is 200 marks
• The Preparatory examination papers is set by the teacher and must be moderated by head of department at the school
 and approved by the District Curriculum advisors / facilitator. This is done to ensure that the prescribed weightings are
 adhered to by the teacher.
• The mark allocation of the externally three –hour final examination is 200 marks
• In the Grade 12 examination only Grade 12 content will be assessed. However, prior knowledge from Grades 10 – 11 may
 be necessary to interpret and answer some other questions.

4.5.4 Practical Assessment Task (PAT)

The Department of Basic Education issues a Practical Assessment Task for Grade 12 every year. The practical assessment tasks
for Grade 12 will be assessed by the teacher and will be externally moderated by the provincial subject specialists. The date for
the external moderation will be decided by the province in which the school is situated. The provincial education departments or
schools may not change the prescribed task or use the task of the previous year. provision of the resources for the Practical
Assessment Task is the responsibility of the school and schools should ensure that adequate time and funding is allocated for
the completion of the Practical Assessment Task.

4.6.1 Examination Weighting in Automotive

The following table shows the weighting of topics in Mechanical Technology: Automotive
 Marks
 Question Topic +/- 4

 GENERIC

 1 Multiple-choice questions 6

 2 Safety 10

 3 Materials 14

 SPECIFIC

 4 Multiple Choice 14

 5 Tools and Equipment 23

 140
 6 Engines 28

 7 Forces 32

 8 Maintenance 23

 9 Systems and Control (Automatic Gearbox) 18

 10 Systems and Control (Axles, Steering Geometry and Electronics) 32

 Total 200

4.6.2 Examination Weighting in Mechanical Technology: Fitting and Machining

The following table shows the weighting of topics in Mechanical Technology: Fitting and Machining

 Marks
 Question Topic +/- 4

 GENERIC

 1 Multiple-choice questions 6

 2 Safety 10

 3 Materials 14

 SPECIFIC

 4 Multiple-choice questions 14

 5 Terminology (Lathe and Milling Machine) 18

 6 Terminology (Indexing) 28

 7 Tools and Equipment 13

 8 Forces 33

 9 Maintenance 18

 10 Joining Methods 18

 Systems and Control (Drive Systems) 28

 Total 200

 141
 4.6.3 Examination Weighting in Welding and Metalwork

The following table shows the weighting of topics in Mechanical Technology Welding and Metalwork
 Marks
 Question Topic
 +/- 4
 GENERIC

 1 Multiple-choice questions 6

 2 Safety 10

 3 Materials 14

 SPECIFIC

 4 Multiple-choice questions 14

 5 Terminology (Templates) 23

 6 Tools and Equipment 18

 Forces
 7 Joining Methods (Inspection of Weld) 45
 Joining Methods (Stresses and Distortion) Maintenance

 Joining Methods (Inspection of Weld)
 8 Joining Methods (Stresses and Distortion) Maintenance 23

 9 Joining Methods (Stresses and Distortion) 18
 10 Maintenance 8

 11 Terminology (Developments) 21

 200
 Total
 Marks

 142
 23. Physical Sciences

SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT IN GRADE 12 PHYSICAL SCIENCES

4.1. FORMAL ASSESSMENT

All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as Formal Assessment. Formal
assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and certification purposes. All Formal
Assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance and to ensure that appropriate standards are
maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a grade and in
a subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, practical tasks, projects, oral presentations,
demonstrations, performances, etc. Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal Programme of Assessment in
each grade and subject.

4.1.1. Control tests & examinations in Grade 12

Control tests and examinations are written under controlled conditions within a specified period of time. Control Tests should be
comprised of ONE paper and Examinations should comprise of TWO papers. Control tests should cover the content for the
whole term as well as content from grades 10 and 11 that is examinable in grade 12, as given in Table 6. Questions in tests and
examinations should assess performance at different cognitive levels with an emphasis on process skills, critical thinking,
scientific reasoning and strategies to investigate and solve problems in a variety of scientific, technological, environmental and
everyday contexts. Questions in tests and examinations should assess performance with an emphasis on innovative thinking that
includes a variety of problem solving methodologies.

Examination papers and control tests in Physical Sciences Grade 12 should adhere to the weighting of cognitive levels given in
Table 1. See APPENDIX 1 in the Physical Sciences Curriculum Policy and Assessment Statement for a detailed description of
the cognitive levels.

Table 1: Prescribed weighting of cognitive levels for examinations and control tests

 COGNITIVE PAPER 1 PAPER 2
 DESCRIPTION
 LEVEL (PHYSICS) (CHEMISTRY)

 1 Remembering 15 % 15 %

 2 Understanding 35 % 40 %

 3 Applying, Analysing 40 % 35 %

 4 Evaluating, Creating 10 % 10 %

 143
 4.1.2. Content for Control Tests and Examinations in Grade 12

Table 2: Content for control tests and examinations for Grade 12

 Grade Assessment Item Content covered Term

 12 Control test 1 • All Grade 12 content covered in Term 1; and 1
 1 Paper • The province should select some topics from Table 6: Examinable Topics from
 2 hour duration Grades 10 & 11 in Grade 12, given below.

 Formal Test • All Grade 12 content covered in Term 2; and 2
 1 Paper • Select relevant topics from Grade 11 Physics Topics:
 1-hour duration Newton’s Laws (Newton 1, 2, 3 and Newton’s Law of Universal
 100 Marks Gravitation) and Application of Newton’s Laws.
 Electrostatics (Coulomb’s Law and Electric field) Electric circuits
 (Ohm’s Law, Power and Energy); and
 • Select relevant topics from Grades 10 and 11 Chemistry Topics:
 Representing chemical change (grade 10)
 Intermolecular forces (grade 11)
 Stoichiometry (grade 11)
 Energy and Change (grade 11)

 12 Preparatory • All Grade 12 content, concepts and skills as prescribed in the CAPS for terms 1- 3; 3
 Examination • Grade 11 Physics Topics:
 2 Papers Newton’s Laws (Newton 1, 2, 3 and Newton’s Law of Universal
 Each paper of 3 Gravitation) and Application of Newton’s Laws.
 hour duration Electrostatics (Coulomb’s Law and Electric field) Electric circuits
 (Ohm’s Law, Power and Energy); and
 • Grades 10 and 11 Chemistry Topics:
 Representing chemical change (grade 10)
 Intermolecular forces (grade 11)
 Stoichiometry (grade 11)
 Energy and Change (grade 11)

 144
 12 Final Examination • All Grade 12 content, concepts and skills as prescribed in the CAPS for terms 1- 4; 4
 and
 • Grade 11 Physics Topics:
 Newton’s Laws (Newton 1, 2, 3 and Newton’s Law of Universal
 Gravitation) and Application of Newton’s Laws.
 Electrostatics (Coulomb’s Law and Electric field) Electric circuits
 (Ohm’s Law, Power and Energy); and
 • Grades 10 and 11 Chemistry Topics:
 Representing chemical change (grade 10)
 Intermolecular forces (grade 11)
 Stoichiometry (grade 11)
 Energy and Change (grade 11)

4.1.3. Practical investigations & experiments

Practical investigations and experiments should focus on the practical aspects and the process skills required for scientific inquiry
and problem solving. Assessment activities should be designed so that learners are assessed on their use of scientific inquiry
skills, like planning, observing and gathering information, comprehending, synthesising, generalising, hypothesising and
communicating results and conclusions. Practical investigations should assess performance at different cognitive levels and focus
on process skills, critical thinking, scientific reasoning and strategies to investigate and solve problems in a variety of scientific,
technological, environmental and everyday contexts.

For the purposes of this curriculum the difference between a practical investigation and an experiment is that an experiment is
conducted to verify or test a known theory whereas an investigation is an activity that is conducted to test a hypothesis i.e. the
result or outcome is not known beforehand.

4.2. REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADE 12 PRACTICAL WORK

In grade 12 learners will do TWO experiments for formal assessment (ONE Chemistry and ONE Physics experiment), selected
from Table 3 given below. One experiment must be done in term 1 and another one in either term 2 or term 3. This gives a total
of TWO formal assessments for practical work in Physical Sciences in Grade 12.

Irrespective of the term in which an experiment is conducted and assessed, all recording of marks for practical work in the SBA
will be done in terms 1 and 3.

 145
 The province should select the two formal experiments from Table 3 given below:

Table 3: List of Formal Practical Activities

 Recommended Practical Activities for
 Grade Term Recommended Practical Activities for Physics
 Chemistry

 Term1 • Verify the conservation of linear momentum. • Prepare a minimum of three esters.
 • Determine the acceleration due to gravity • Reaction of alkanes and alkenes with
 bromine and potassium permanganate

 Term 2 • Perform simple experiments to determine the work done and • Determine the unknown concentration
 power expended in walking up (or running up) a flight of of an acid or base by titration against a
 stairs. standard solution
 • Determine factors affecting the rate of a
 reaction.

 Term 3 • Electricity: Resistance • Verify the reactions that take place in a
 Part 1 galvanic cell and an electrolytic cell.
 Determine the internal resistance of a battery.
 Part 2
 12 Set up a series-parallel network with resistors of known
 resistance. Determine the equivalent resistance using an
 ammeter and a voltmeter and compare with the theoretical
 value.
 • Series-parallel Networks:
 Set up a series-parallel network with an ammeter in each
 branch and external circuit and voltmeters across each
 resistor, branch and battery, position switches in each branch
 and external circuit. Use this circuit to investigate short circuits
 and open circuits.

 Term 4

It is recommended that for informal assessment all learners in Grade 12 should do a minimum of TWO experiments (ONE
Chemistry and ONE Physics experiment).

 146
 Table 4: Practical work for grades 12

 Practical work Grade 12

 Experiments for formal assessment 1 Physics and
 1 Chemistry

 Project (informal assessment) NONE

 Experiments (informal assessment) 1 Physics and
 1 Chemistry

 TOTAL 4

The forms of assessment used should be age - and developmental level appropriate. The design of these tasks should cover the
content of the subject and include a variety of tasks designed to achieve the objectives of the subject.

4.3. PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout the terms.

4.3.1. Programme of formal assessment for grade 12

Assessment consists of two components: a School Based Assessment which makes up 25% of the total mark for Physical
Sciences and an external examination which makes up the remaining 75%. The School Based Assessment for Physical Sciences
comprises five tasks that are internally assessed. Together the School Based Assessment and external assessment make up
the annual assessment plan for Grade 12. The Programme of Assessment (POA) is also called the Annual Assessment Plan

 147
 Table 5 illustrates the assessment plan and weighting of tasks in the programme of assessment for Physical Sciences Grade 12.

Table 5: Annual Assessment plan and weighting of tasks in the programme of assessment for grade 12

 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT FOR GRADE 12

 INTERNAL ASSESSMENT (SBA) EXTERNAL ASSESSMENT

 END-OF-YEAR
 ASSESSMENT TASKS (25%)
 ASSESSMENT (75%)

 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4

 Type Weighting and Type Weighting and Type Weighting and Final Examination
 duration duration duration (2 x 150 marks giving a total
 of 300 marks for papers 1
 Experiment 15% (Minimum Formal Test 1 Paper Experiment 15% (Minimum
 and 2)
 50 marks and Duration: 1 50 marks and
 3 hour duration for each of
 minimum 2 Hour minimum
 Papers 1 and 2
 hour duration) (20%) 2 hour
 duration)
 Control 20% Preliminary 30%
 Test (1 x 100 marks) Examination (2 x 150 marks)
 2 hours Paper 1: 150
 duration marks
 50 marks for Paper 2: 150
 Physics topics marks
 and 50 marks 3 hour duration
 for Chemistry for each of
 topics Papers
 1 and 2

 Total Weighting: 35% Total Weighting: 20% Total Weighting: 45%

 FINAL MARK = 25% (ASSESSMENT TASKS) +75% (FINAL EXAM)=100%

4.3.2. END-OF-YEAR EXAMINATIONS

4.3.2.1. Grade 12 (external assessment)

The external examinations are set externally, administered at schools under conditions specified in the National policy on the
conduct, administration and management of the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications
Framework (NQF) and marked externally.

 148
 The core content outlined in the Physical Sciences Curriculum and Assessment Policy (CAPS) document is compulsory and will
be examined through Papers 1 and 2. Note that all the topics in the grade 12 curriculum are examinable in the end of year
examination plus selected topics from grades 10 and 11. Below is a list of selected content, outlined for Grades 10 and 11 in the
CAPS document that is also examinable in the Grade 12 final examination.

Table 6: Examinable Topics from Grades 10 & 11 in Grade 12

 Selected Examinable Topics from Grades 10 & 11 in Grade
 12

 Physics from grade 11 Chemistry from grades 10 and 11

 1. Newton’s Laws (Newton 1, 2, 3 and Newton’s Law of 1. Representing chemical change (grade 10)
 Universal Gravitation) and Application of Newton’s Laws. 2. Intermolecular forces (grade 11)
 2. Electrostatics (Coulomb’s Law and Electric field) 3. Stoichiometry (grade 11)
 3. Electric circuits (Ohm’s Law, Power and Energy) 4. Energy and Change (grade 11)

Multiple-choice questions could be set in examination papers. However, such questions should have a weighting not exceeding
15%. The examination paper may also consist of conceptual type questions. The final end-of-year examination is nationally set,
marked and moderated.

The nationally set, marked and moderated examination will consist of two papers:

• Paper 1: Physics focus (3 hours, 150 marks)
• Paper 2: Chemistry focus (3 hours, 150 marks)
• All of the questions will focus on content as stated in the National Curriculum Statement.
• Questions will reflect the different levels of the Physical Sciences Assessment Taxonomy (APPENDIX 1 of CAPS)
 appropriate to the paper.

Table 7 shows the weighting of questions across cognitive levels and the specification and suggested weighting of the content
for the Grade 12 end-of-year examinations (across the two papers).

 149
 Table 7: Weighting of questions across cognitive levels, the specification and suggested weighting of the content for
the Grade 12 end-of-year examination

 GRADE 12

 Total Weighting of Questions Across Cognitive
 Duration
 Paper Content Marks Marks/ Levels
 (Hours)
 Paper Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4

 Mechanics 65

 PAPER1: PHYSICS Waves, Sound & Light 15
 150 3 15 % 35 % 40 % 10 %
 FOCUS Electricity & Magnetism 55

 Matter & Materials 15

 PAPER 2: Chemical Change 92
 CHEMISTRY Matter & Materials 58 150 3 15 % 40 % 35 % 10 %
 FOCUS

4.4. RECORDING AND REPORTING

Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment task. It
indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge and skills as prescribed in the Curriculum and Assessment
Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual progression within a
grade and her / his readiness to progress or be promoted to the next grade. Records of learner performance should also be used
to verify the progress made by teachers and learners in the teaching and learning process.
Schools are required to provide quarterly feedback to parents on the Programme of Assessment using a formal reporting tool
such as a report card.

The schedule and the report card should indicate the overall level of performance of a learner. Schools should use the following
weighting for reporting purposes only and only in the first, second and third terms of Grade12:

 Practical Work Control test/ trial exam

 Weighting 25% 75%

4.4.1. Recording and reporting on the Assessment Tasks and SBA in the Programme of Assessment
Schools are also required to provide quarterly feedback to parents and learners of the marks obtained by learners in the
assessment tasks in the SBA as given in table 5. This report should adhere strictly to the weighting of tasks given in table 5 and
should use a formal reporting tool.

4.4.2. Recording and reporting at the end of the academic year
The weighting of tasks in the Programme of Assessment must be strictly adhered to when calculating the FINAL MARK of the
learner for promotion purposes in Grade 12, at the end of the academic year.

 150
 4.5. MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT

Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should be
implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation practices must be in
place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

All Grade 12 tasks should be internally and externally moderated. The subject head or departmental head for Physical Sciences
at the school will generally manage this process in collaboration with the relevant stake holders. A 10% sample of learners’
portfolios will be moderated for schools that have more than 50 learners in the grade. If the number of learners is less than 50 a
sample of 5 portfolios will be moderated.

Moderation of a term’s formal experiment can be done as early as in the following term, i.e. experiment 1 can be moderated at
the beginning of the second term.

The moderation of the practical work (formal experiments) which is part of the SBA, should be onsite (face-to-face
moderation). This onsite moderation should include the following process:
• During onsite (face-to-face) moderation learners may be selected at random to demonstrate the different skills developed
 while conducting the experiments.
• During onsite moderation a random sample of learners may be selected and asked to conduct the formal experiments and
 to answer questions based on them.
• Learners may not request or obtain assistance from other learners during moderation.
• The school must ensure that all apparatus for these experiments are available and in working condition at school during
 moderation.
• Upon completion of the moderation process the moderator will, if necessary, adjust marks of the entire group upwards or
 downwards.
• Normal examination protocols for appeals will be adhered to.

 151
 24. Religion Studies

Grade 12

Formal assessments
In Grade 12 four tasks are internally set and assessed and make up 25% of the total mark for Religion Studies, the
fifth task is the external examination which is externally set and moderated and makes up the remaining 75%.
Programme of assessment
The programme of assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout
the school year.

The weighting of marks for the five formal assessment tasks for Grade 12 Religion Studies is as follows:
Grade 12

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4

 Task 1 Task 3 Task 4 Task 5

 Source-based Project Trial examination External examination
 100 marks 100 Marks 300 marks 300 marks

 Task 2
 Test 100 marks

GRADE 12 END-OF-YEAR EXAMINATION
Paper: One
Time: 2 hours
Mark allocation: 150

 GRADE 12 PAPER ONE : TOPICS TO BE COVERED

 1. Variety of religions • Conceptual distinctions

 • Unique features of various religions

 2. Common features of religion • Religious teachings

 3. Topical issues in society • Role of media in influencing public opinion on religion

 • Religious freedom, human rights and responsibilities

 4. Research into and across religions • Religion in areas of conflict in South Africa, Africa and the world

 152
 Paper ONE is divided into Section A and Section B
A learner will be required to answer THREE questions
Section A compulsory (50 marks)
The questions will include a combination of two or more types of questions ranging from:
• Multiple choice
• Fill in the blanks
• True or false with reasons
• Matching columns
• Odd word out, with reason
• One-word answers
• It may also include questions that require short explanations, definitions or brief descriptions

Section B Choose Two out of Three or Four Questions (50x2 =100)

Learners will answer two scenario-based, source-based, case study or short open-ended questions. Answers will
range from short responses to paragraphs. A short text/diagram/data/graphs/ may be provided as a stimulus.
The trial examinations in Grade 12 will be similar to the external examinations.

 Examinable Topics from Grades 10 and 11 in Grade 12
 Grade 12 paper 1
 Major dimensions common to all religions (from Gr 10)

Paper: Two
Time: 2 hours
Mark allocation: 150 marks

 GRADE 12 PAPER TWO: TOPICS TO BE COVERED

 1. Variety of religions • Internal to differentiations within religions

 • Main features of such differentiations

 • History and present dynamics of inter-religious relationships

 153
 2. Common features • The central teachings in one religion
 of religion as a • Normative sources in various religions
 generic and unique • Interpreting one normative source
 phenomenon • Analysis of secular worldviews

 • The origin, purpose and influencing factors behind at least two worldviews

 3. Topical issues in • Developing a strategy to solve a major social problem
 society

 4. Research into and • Religion and the Natural Sciences
 across religions

Learners will answer three focused extended writing questions from a choice of four or five questions :( 50 marks
each)

Questions will focus on analysing and interpreting generic issues pertaining to religions:

• Learners are expected to present a position on an issue/or issues from religious perspectives and to
 argue/critique this position.
• A source may be included to act as a stimulus.
• The Grade 12 examination guideline will provide details of the social problems that will be addressed for a
 particular year.

 Examinable Topics from Grades 10 and 11 in Grade 12

 Grade 12 paper 2

 Religion and the state (from Gr 11)

 Types of rituals and their roles (from Gr 11)

 154
 TESTS

Test: Grade 12

Time: 1 and half hours
Mark allocation: 100

SECTION A
Compulsory (30 marks)
The questions have to be a combination of two or more types of questions ranging from:
• Multiple choice
• Fill in the blanks
• True or false with reasons
• Matching columns
• One-word answers
• It may also include questions that require short explanations, definitions or brief descriptions
SECTION B
Learners will answer a short source-based questions (40 marks) and an extended writing (30 marks)
RECORDING AND REPORTING
When recording and reporting on learner performance in Religion Studies, the following marks are applicable per
term.

 Term Assessment task Mark per term Year %

 Recording Reporting

 1 Source-based Task 100 100
 600/ 6 = 100 (SBA)
 Test 100 100

 2 Project 100 100

 3 Trial examination 300 100

 600/6 100

 4 SBA 100 25%

 External examination 300 75%

 Total for end of year 100%

 155
 A LIST OF VERBS FOR THE DIFFERENT COGNITIVE LEVELS

 L1 and L 2 L3 and L 4 L5 and L 6

 Remembering Understanding Applying Analysing Evaluating Creating

 Exhibit memory Demonstrate Solve Examine and Present and Compile
 of previously understanding of problems to break defend opinions information
 learned facts and ideas new situations information into by making together in a
 material by by: organising, by applying parts by judgements different way by
 recalling facts, comparing, acquired identifying about combining
 basic concepts; translating, knowledge, reasons or information, elements in a
 and answers. interpreting, facts causes. Make validity of ideas new pattern or
 giving techniques inference and or quality of proposing an
 descriptions and and rules in a find evidence to work based on a alternative
 stating main different way. support set of criteria solution
 ideas. generalisations.

 Choose Classify Apply Analyse Apply Change
 Define Compare Choose Assume Appraise Choose
 Find Contrast Develop Categorise Assess Combine
 How Explain Identify Classify Compare Compile
 List Illustrate Interview Compare Conclude Compose
 Match Outline Construct Contrast Consider Construct
 Name Summarise Report Conclude Criticise Create
 Relate Infer Change Distinguish Decide Develop
 Select Relate Conclude Examine Defend Elaborate
 What Show Demonstrate Infer Determine Imagine
 When Demonstrate Discuss Explain Evaluate Improve
 Where Illustrate Explain Plan
 Which Interpret Interpret Predict
 Who Report Judge Propose
 Why Review Justify Solve
 Summarise Recommend Suppose
 Tell Support Produce
 Prepare Argue
 Show

 156
 Source-based task
The source-based task must be completed independently under controlled conditions. The teacher is required to
facilitate the process in class. However, the completion of the task should not be administered as a class test

Sources may be taken from newspaper articles, magazine articles, websites video clips or radio recordings. All
sources must be acknowledged. Through these sources, learners are presented with a real-life situation, a current
problem or an incident relating to a topic in the curriculum. They are expected to assume a particular role in
articulating the position, and respond to particular questions from various cognitive orders. They should draw on
their own experience or prior learning to interpret, analyze, give advice, and make suggestion/s or
recommendation/s to defend arguments and/or solve the problem based on informed decision-making.

Information provided in the sources must be current, up-to-date, grade and age-appropriate, learner-friendly and
devoid of racial, cultural, religious, sexual orientation and gender bias. The sources selected should have direct links
with the Religion Studies content in the CAPS.
The source based task must include questions at lower, middle and higher cognitive levels. The following must be
provided:
A marking memorandum or marking guideline with an exhaustive list of possible alternate answers to assess
learners.
A marking grid indicating the cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy levels 1-6 must be provided. There must be a
distribution of marks reflecting 30% low order, 40% middle order and 30% high order.

Project
Learners will spend time outside of contact time to collect resources and information. The completion of the task
should be facilitated by the teacher in class time.
The project will be a task in which learners will demonstrate knowledge, skills, values and competencies in specific
or integrated content. The project requires extended reading and writing on the part of the learner. Teachers should
give the necessary guidance prior to commencement and during completion of the project and monitor the progress
of learners throughout. The objective for the project should be clear and thorough planning should take place, e.g.
preparing the questions for an interview.
The topic and nature of the project will be determined by the content covered according to the annual teaching
plan.

Learners will need adequate guidance at the outset of the project and progress should be monitored throughout
the process. All assessment criteria applicable to the project has to be discussed with the learners prior to the
commencement of the project

 157
 When preparing a project, consider these minimum requirements.
 Choose a relevant topic
 The project could take the form of interviews, surveys, observations etc.
 The objective /purpose/ reasons for the project should be clear.
 Thorough planning should take place e.g.
 - Brainstorm the topic.
 - Draw a mind map outlining the project.
 - Prepare questions for the interview.
 Research the content.
 Analyse and collate data/information.
 The findings should be structured in the form of an essay with sub-headings.
 The project may be supplemented with the following:
 - Compiling brochures
 - Writing newspaper/ magazine articles, advertisements
 - Pictures, photos
 - Making videos
 - Drawing / taking / selecting relevant pictures
 - Preparing a presentation or a wall chart
 A conclusion and/ or recommendations/ suggestions / solutions / advice / practical strategies should be
 provided.
 Reflection: How did the project/participation affect your thinking, attitude or behaviour regarding the issue?
 Include a bibliography where the titles of books, articles, websites and the other sources of information
 consulted are listed.
 The project must have a cover page and table of contents.
 The project should be bound or stapled.

NB: A marking guideline, should be provided. Provision must be made for additional answers as well as the learners’
own interpretation of the questions. Constructive feedback should be provided to learners upon completion of
assessment.

The guideline for marking could be a memorandum, rubric, matrix, criteria checklist etc.
A marking grid indicating the cognitive levels of Bloom’s taxonomy levels 1-6 must be provided. There must be a
distribution of marks reflecting 30% low order, 40% middle order and 30% high order.

 158
 GLOSSARY

 CONCEPT DEFINITION

 Adaptation Acclimatisation to a situation

 Adherent Someone who belongs / follows a particular religion

 African Traditional A religious belief system indigenous to Africa
 Religion

 Agnosticism The view that there is insufficient information for the existence or non- existence of
 God

 Altar Flat topped stone / surface used in religious ceremonies

 Anthropologist Person who studies humankind and cultures through history

 Archaeology A study of proofs of the way people lived , from very old ruins, human and animal
 bones

 Atheism A belief system that there is no God

 Buddhism The teachings of Siddhartha Gautama about enlightenment

 Census A system of counting citizens of a country

 Cluster Belonging to the same group

 Colonialism A system of one country dominating another country.

 Comparability Juxtaposing two ideas / things. Identifying similarities and differences.

 Conform Fit to a standard

 Contemporary Something recent

 Demographical data Statistical data related to the population and particular groups within it.

 Dynamics Expected / unexpected happenings

 Ecumenism Are those activities aimed at finding unity and cooperation between Christian
 denominations

 Elements Essential parts that make a whole

 Ethics Moral principles that govern a person’s behaviour or the conducting of an activity

 Evolution A process of development /growth; progression to a higher stage

 Expounded Presented and explained theory or idea in detail

 Governance Action/way of governing and controlling

 159
 Halaal Permissible in Islamic law

Harmony A state of being in agreement. Peace / serenity

Humanism A way of thinking that focuses on human relationships with one another and the
 environment. Humanists do not include God, a supreme being or other gods in their
 thinking.

Humanity An expectation of how human behaviour should be

Hunter- gatherer An economy of hunting and gathering food together

Ideology A way of thinking relating to a group or individuals.

Impact After effects/ consequences

Impartiality Decisions are made based on objective criteria and not on the basis of any prejudice
 or bias.

Imperialism A policy of extending a country’s power and influence using military force or other
 means

Inter- religious dialogue Interactive agreement between / among religions

Liberation A system of setting free

Manifestation A sign or a(human) form of something abstract (God)/ demonstration

Meditation A deep thinking and communication to a deity / God

Monarchy A kingdom / state led by a king / queen

Monotheism Belief in one God

Mutual Working / winning together

Mysticism A state of seeking a deep relationship with the divine

Narrative Story

Normative tradition An exercise of doing things according to agreed standards

Nun A female devotee in the Roman Catholic Church

Objectivity Not taking a side / part (not favouring any religion)

Oligarchy Power concentrated in a few persons

Opinion How one believes/sees or is convinced about a thought/life

Pantheism A belief that all is God and that God is in everything

Pastor A leader in a religion

 160
 Pattern A constructive strand of design repeated for decoration or reinforcement

Perspective An agreed way of presenting

Philosophy The way of thinking

Politics Activities aimed at increasing someone‘s status or increasing power within an
 organisation

Polytheism A belief in many gods

Practices Ways of doing things

Priest A leader of a spiritual congregation

Principles Fundamental truth

Prophet The agent of prediction, often based on messages from God.

Proselytisation Preaching / evangelising and even forcing others to convert

Protocol Rules about appropriate behaviour and dress

Pundit A leader who has studied Hindu scriptures

Quran Holy book of Islam

Rabbi Religious leader of the Jewish faith

Revitalisation A system of giving a new shape / life

Rituals Agreed upon religious practices

Sacred Holy

Sikhism The religion that originated in the Punjab region of the Indian sub-continent about
 the end of the 15th century

Subjectivity Looking at something from your own point of view as an insider

Surveys To get right measurement

Synagogue Place of worship for Jews

Syncretism When one religion incorporates the teachings, beliefs or practices of another religion

Tenach Holy writings of Judaism

Taoism A religion that originated in China

Theocracy The leadership of God to the people

Transformation A process of accepting new ways of doing things

 161
 Ubuntu African ethic which respect and care for others

Vedas Texts which originated in India (Hinduism)

Worship The feeling or expression of reverence and adoration to a deity or God

Xenophobia Irrational fear, intolerance and hatred of foreigners

Yiddish Language developed form German and Hebrew

 162
 25. Second Additional Languages

Note: Refer to Section 4 of the CAPS

4.4 Programme of Assessment
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout a term.
4.4.1 Overview of requirements

The following tables provide an overview of the Programme of Assessment requirements for each term for Second Additional
Languages:

Table 3: Overview of the Programme of Assessment Requirements Grade 12

 Programme of assessment
 External examination
 Tasks per term

 Term 1: Term 2: Term 3: Term 4:
 2 Tasks 2 Tasks 2 Tasks 1 External Examination comprising 3
 + Trial examination comprising 3 Papers: Papers:
 1 Written Test Paper 1 – Language in Context (80) – 2 Paper 1 – Paper 1 – Language in
 hrs Context (80) – 2 hrs
 Paper 2: Literature (40) – 1,5 hrs Paper 2: Literature (40) – 1,5 hrs
 Paper 3 – Writing (80) – 2,5 hrs (Can be Paper 3 – Writing (80) – 2,5 hrs
 written in August or September) Paper 4 – Oral (100)

 Term mark (Terms 1 – 3):
 • Each term, add totals and convert to % for term mark.
 SBA mark:
 • Add totals for tasks from term 1 to term 3, excluding oral marks, and convert to 25%
 External examination
 • Convert Paper 1 to 20%,
 • Convert Paper 2 to 10%,
 • Convert Paper 3 to 20%,
 • Add totals for orals tasks throughout the year and convert to 25% (Paper 4).

 163
 Table 4: Programme of Assessment Grade 12

 Programme of Assessment

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1

 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

 *Oral: (25 marks) *Oral: (25 marks) **Test: (40 marks)
 Conversation Listening comprehension Language in context:
 Comprehension
 Summary
 Language structures and conventions

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2

 Task 4 Task 5

 *Oral: (25 marks) Literature: (40 marks)
 Prepared speech Literature Contextual questions

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3

 Task6 Task 7 Task 8

 *Oral: (25 marks) Writing: (40 marks) Trial examinations: (200 marks)
 Prepared reading aloud Narrative/ Descriptive essay Paper 1 – Language in context (80) – 2 hrs
 Paper 2: Literature (40) - 1,5 hrs
 Paper 3 – Writing (80) (Can be written in August/
 September) – 2,5 hrs

 Evidence must be available of informal assessment of writing activities: essays, longer and shorter transactional texts in each
 term according to the requirements of the Teaching Plans.
*Orals: Learners should do one prepared speech task, one conversation task, one listening task, and one prepared reading aloud
task during the year.

**Test could be set out of 40 marks or, if more, should be converted to 40 marks. While the Comprehension, Summary,
Language structures and conventions in context combination is suggested, teachers are urged to design a combination of aspects
that fits the character (test programme, time allocation, etc.) of the school.

Note: A test in the Programme of Assessment should not be made up of several smaller tests. Each test should cover a substantial
amount of content, should be set for 45-60 minutes, and should reflect the different cognitive levels as set out for exam papers.

 164
 26. Technical Mathematics

Programme of Assessment

The programme of assessment in Technical Mathematics has not changed except that formula sheet MUST be provided for
tests and final examinations in Grades 10, 11 and 12.
All learners in grades 10-12 should be provided with formula sheet similar to the one given in Grade 12 for all examinations.
Assignments are generally extended pieces of work completed individually at school under control supervision with access to
resources.

At most one project or investigation should be administered in a year.

·It is compulsory to administer one assignment in each grade (10-12). The option of offering an assignment or a test in grades 10
- 12 is discontinued. All 7 tasks should be administered as indicated in the table below.

The table below also reflects the new the weightings for assignment and project or investigation.

Learners are expected to have seven (7) formal assessment tasks for their school-based assessment in grades 10 and 11 and
six (6) in grade 12.

The number of tasks and their weighting are listed below:
 GRADE 10 GRADE 11 GRADE 12

 WEIGHT WEIGHT WEIGHT
 TASKS (%) TASKS (%) TASKS (%)

 Test
 Test Test Project / 10
 10 10
 Term 1 Project / Project/ Investigation 15
 15 15
 Investigation Investigation Assignment 15

 Assignment 15 Assignment 15 Test 10
 Term 2 Test 10 Test 10

 Test 10 Test 10 Test 10
 Term 3 Test 10 Test 10 Trial 25
 Examination

 Test 10 Test 10
 Term 4

 School-based Assessment 80 80 85
 mark

 School-based Assessment
 mark (as % of promotion mark) 25% 25% 25%

 PAT Task 25% Task 25% Task 25%

 End-of-year examinations 50% 50% 50%

 165
 Promotion mark 100% 100%

 Note:
  Investigation/project should be done in term ONE. Only ONE project/investigation should be set per year.
  Tests should be at least ONE hour long and count at least 50 marks.
  For purposes of term reporting: the following should appear in the learner’s report:
 Grades 10 and 11, Term 1, Project or Investigation 25%, PAT 25% and Test 50%. Term 2, Assignment 25%, PAT 25% and Test 50%
 Term 3, PAT 25% and Two tests 75%. Promotional Report, the combination SBA 25%, PAT 25% and Exam 50%

 Grade 12, Term 1, project/investigation must contribute 15%, assignment 10% PAT 25% and test 50%. Term 2, test 75%, PAT 25%
 Term 3, test must contribute 25% PAT 25% and preparatory exam 50%.
  No calculators with programmable functions, facilities or symbolic facilities (for example, to factorise
 a 2 b2 (a b)(a b) , or to find roots of equations) will be allowed. Calculators should only be used
 to perform standard numerical computations and to verify calculations by hand.

The table below shows the compilation of the school based assessment (SBA) mark for grade 12

 Description Time Frame Weighting in terms of final SBA mark

 Test, Assignment and Investigation Term 1 40%

 Test Term 2 25%

 Test and Trial examination Term 3 35%

 Total SBA Mark 100%

The Grade 12 Programme of Assessment for Technical Mathematics

 Programme of Assessment for Technical Mathematics Grade 12

 Assessment Tasks Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4 % of Final Marks
 Promotion Mark

 Test 1 (10% of SBA) 1 paper 10 The marks of all three
 tasks are converted
 Assignment /test (10% according to the
 of SBA) weightings to give a
 total mark out of 100
 Investigation (20%)

 SBA Test (10% of SBA) 2 6,25 25
 papers

 Test (10% of SBA) 2 papers 8,75

 Trial examination
 (25% of SBA)

 166
 Practical 1 (40% of 1 10 The marks of all three
 PAT) tasks are converted
 according to the
 Practical 2 (30% of 1 7.5 weightings to give a
 PAT 25
 PAT) total mark out of 100

 Practical 3 (30% of 1 7.5
 PAT)

 2 Final Examination Paper 1 25 2 x 150 marks giving
 papers of equal a total of 300 marks
 External weight Paper 2 25 for papers 1 and 2.
 50
Examination The 300 marks is
 converted to 200
 marks.

 Final SBA + PAT + Final
Promotion 100 Examination = 100 +
 Mark 100 + 200 = 400

 167
 27. Technical Sciences

4. ASSESSMENT

4.1 Introduction

Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the performance of
learners, using various forms of assessment. It involves four steps: generating and collecting evidence of achievement; evaluating
this evidence; recording the findings; and using this information to understand and thereby assist the learners’ development to
improve the process of learning and teaching.

Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning). In both cases regular
feedback should be provided to learners to enhance the learning experience. Assessment is a process that measures individual
learner’s attainment of knowledge (content, concepts and skills) in a subject by collecting, analysing and interpreting the data and
information obtained from this process to:

• enable the teacher to make reliable judgements about a learner’s progress
• inform learners about their strengths, weaknesses and progress
• assist teachers, parents and other stakeholders in making decisions about the learning process and the progress of the
 learners. Assessment should be mapped against the content, concepts and skills, and the aims specified for Technical
 Sciences, and in both informal and formal assessments it is important to ensure that in the course of a school year:
• all the subject content is covered
• the full range of skills is included
• a variety of different forms of assessment are used.

4.2 Informal or daily assessment

Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on a learner’s achievements that can be used to
improve their learning. Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress.

This is done through observations, discussions, practical demonstrations, learner-teacher conferences, informal classroom
interactions, etc. Informal assessment may be as simple as stopping during the lesson to observe learners or to discuss with
learners how learning is progressing. Informal assessment should be used to provide feedback to the learners and to inform
planning for teaching but need not be recorded. It should not be separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom.
Learners or teachers can mark these assessment tasks.

Informal, on-going assessments should be used to structure the acquisition of knowledge and skill should be precursors to formal
tasks in the Programme of Assessment (POA).

 168
 4.3 Formal assessment

FORMAL assessment consists of SBA, PAT and the Final Examination. All assessment tasks that make up the formal Programme
of Assessment for the year are regarded as Formal Assessment. Examples of formal assessments include control tests,
examinations and PAT.

Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and certification purposes. All Formal
Assessment tasks are subject to moderation for quality assurance and to ensure that appropriate standards are maintained.

4.3.1. Formal Assessment for Grade 12

THREE experiments are done per year. These experiments constitute the Practical Assessment Task (PAT). One experiment is
conducted per term for each of terms 1, 2 and 3. ONE control test, ONE trial examination and ONE final examination are
conducted as formal assessment, assessed and recorded for Grade 12.

 Formal Assessment Grade 12

 SBA: 25% PAT: 25% FINAL EXAMINATION: 50%

 • • 1 control test THREE experiments Two papers
 Preparatory examination (two papers)

TABLE 1

4.3.2 Control tests & examinations for Grade 12

Control tests and examinations should be set using an analysis grid to ensure fair distribution of cognitive levels. Control tests
and examinations are written under controlled conditions within a specified period. Questions in tests and examinations should
assess performance at different cognitive levels with an emphasis on process skills, critical thinking, scientific reasoning and
strategies to investigate and solve problems in a variety of scientific, technological, environmental and everyday contexts.

4.3.2.1. Marks and time allocation for the control test

A single control test should be administered in one sitting and under controlled conditions. The control test will consist of one
paper ONLY.

 169
 Table 2: Mark allocation and Duration of control tests

 Grade Minimum Marks Duration

 12 50 1 hour

4.3.3.2. Structure of the Examinations

The question paper could comprise of multiple choice, matching-columns and structured questions. However,
multiple choice and matching-columns questions should have a maximum weighting of 10% each. It is not
compulsory for a paper to have both multiple choice and matching-column questions, but it should have at least
one of them together with structured questions.

4.3.3.3 Content for control tests and examinations for grade 12

Table 3: Content for control tests and examinations for grade 12

 Grade Assessment Item Content covered Term

 12 Control test 1 Newton’s laws of motion 1
 Momentum
 Work, energy and power
 Elasticity

 12 Preparatory Examination All content, concepts and skills as prescribed in the CAPS for terms 1- 3 3

 12 Final Examination All content, concepts and skills as prescribed in the CAPS for terms 1- 4. 4

4.3.4 Preparatory examinations

The Preparatory examinations will consist of TWO papers and will be internally set, marked and moderated, unless otherwise
instructed by provincial or national departments of education. The question paper could comprise of multiple choice, matching-
columns and structured questions.

However, multiple choice questions and matching-columns questions should have a maximum weighting of 10% each. It is not
compulsory for a paper to have both multiple choice and matching-column questions, but it should have at least one of them
together with structured questions. The preparatory examination for grade 12 should consist of all content, concepts and skills as
prescribed in the CAPS for terms 1- 3.

 170
 4.3.5 End-of-year examinations

Grade 12 Final Examination (external assessment)

The external examinations are set externally, administered at schools under conditions specified in the National policy on the
conduct, administration and management of the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications
Framework (NQF) and marked externally.
The core content outlined in the Technical Sciences Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS) is compulsory and will
be examined in TWO papers. Note that all the topics in the Grade 12 curriculum as stated in the Technical Sciences CAPS are
examinable at the end of year examination.

The question paper could comprise of multiple choice questions (maximum weighting 14%), matching-columns (maximum
weighting 5%), one-word answer (maximum weighting 5%) and structured questions. The final end-of-year examination is
nationally set, marked and moderated. All the questions will focus on content as stated in the National Curriculum Statement.

 Grade 12 Examination Maximum marks Duration

 Preparatory examination

 Paper 1 150 3 hours

 Paper 2 75 1.5 hours

 Final examination

 Paper 1 150 3 hours

 Paper 2 75 1.5 hours

 171
 Table 4: Marks and duration for examination papers in Grade 12

Table 5: Weighting of topics for final and preparatory (trial) examination papers in grade 12

 % Combined Weighting Overall % Weighting % Weighting
 Grade Content
 (% weighting in P1+P2) in Paper 1 in Paper 2

 Mechanics 41.33 62 ----

 Electricity and Magnetism 14.67 22 ----

 12 Matter and materials 10.67 ---- 62

 Chemical change 20.67 ---- 38

 Waves, Sound and Light 12.67 16 ----

4.4 COGNITIVE LEVELS

All assessment tasks should comply with the cognitive levels in Table 6.

Table 6: Weighting and description of cognitive levels

 Cognitive levels Description % Weighting for paper 1 % Weighting for paper 2

 1 Remembering 25 30

 2 Understanding 30 35

 3 Analysing and Applying 40 30

 4 Creating and Evaluating 5 5

4.5 PRACTICAL INVESTIGATIONS/ EXPERIMENTS

Practical investigations/ experiments should focus on the practical aspects and the process skills required for scientific inquiry
and problem solving. Assessment activities should be designed so that learners are assessed on their use of scientific inquiry
skills, like planning, observing and gathering information, comprehending, synthesising, generalising, hypothesising and
communicating results and conclusions.

Practical investigations should assess performance at different cognitive levels and focus on process skills, critical thinking,
scientific reasoning and strategies to investigate and solve problems in a variety of scientific, technological, environmental and
everyday contexts. The difference between a practical investigation and an experiment is that an experiment is conducted to
verify or test a known theory, whereas an investigation is an activity that is conducted to test a hypothesis, i.e. the result or
outcome is not known beforehand.

 172
 4.6 Practical Assessment Task (PAT)

4.6.1. Requirements for PAT

The requirements for the Practical Assessment Task (PAT) are as follows:
• PAT accounts for the skills the learner has mastered;
• PAT accounts for 25% of the learner’s final examination mark;
• The PAT in grade 12 will consist of 3 experiments;
• The PAT must be conducted under controlled conditions;
• The PAT will assess a range of skills that are relevant for the study of Technical Sciences. Some examples of these skills
 are classifying, assembling equipment; observing, troubleshooting; communicating, measuring, designing an investigation,
 conducting an experiment, drawing and evaluating conclusions, formulating models, hypothesising, identifying and
 controlling variables, inferring, observing and comparing, interpreting, analysing, predicting, problem-solving and reflective
 skills;
• Each learner is required to conduct each experiment in the PAT;
• Each learner is assessed as an individual for the PAT; and
• Each learner is expected to write his/her individual report on the PAT.
The table below shows the schedule and weighting of Practical Assessment Task (PAT) experiments.

Table 7: PAT

 Description Time Frame Weighting in terms of final PAT mark

 Experiment Term 1 40%

 Experiment Term 2 30%

 Experiment Term 3 30%

 Total PAT Mark 100%
Note: Each experiment could be set out of a minimum of 30 marks and the total mark should be converted as per the prescribed
weighting.

4.6.2. Assessment of PAT

The assessment tools used, specifying the assessment criteria for each task will be indicated by the nature of the task and the
focus of assessment. The assessment tool could be any one or a combination of rubrics, checklists, observation schedules and
memoranda.

The grade 12 PAT should be externally set. The grade 12 PAT should be both internally and externally moderated.

 173
 4.7 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT FOR GRADE 12

 The Programme of Assessment is designed to distribute the formal assessment tasks across the school terms.

 Formal assessment consists of three components: SBA (25 %), PAT (25%) and the final examination (50%).

 Table 8 illustrates the assessment plan and weighting of tasks in the Programme of Assessment for grade 12.

Table 8: Assessment in grade 12

Programme of Assessment for Technical Sciences Grade 12

 % of Final
Assessment Tasks Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4 Promotion Marks
 Mark

 Control Test 1 The marks of all three tasks are
 1 (35% of paper converted according to the weightings
 8.8
 SBA) to give a total mark out of 100
SBA 25%
 Preparatory
 2
 examination 16.2
 papers
 (65% of SBA)

 Experiment The marks of all three tasks are
 1 10
 (40% of PAT) converted according to the weighting\s
 to give a total mark out of 100
 Experiment
PAT 1 7.5 25%
 (30% of PAT)

 Experiment
 1 7.5
 (30% of PAT)

External 2 Final 2 papers
Examinatio Examination Paper 1 of 150 marks for 3 hours
n papers Paper 2 of 75 marks for 1,5 hours.
 2
 50 50 % 150 marks + 75 marks gives a total of
 papers
 235 marks overall for papers 1 and 2.
 The 225 marks is converted to 200
 marks.

Final SBA + PAT + Final Examination = 100 +
 100
Promotion 100 + 200 = 400
 %
Mark

 174
 Maximum marks for the SBA, PAT and Final Examination for Grade 12

Table 9: Formal assessment marks

 Description Maximum Mark

 SBA 100 marks

 PAT 100 marks

 Final Examination 200 marks

 Programme of Assessment 400 marks

4.8 RECORDING AND REPORTING

Recording is a process in which a teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment task. It
indicates learner’s progress towards the achievement of knowledge and skills as prescribed in the Curriculum and Assessment
Policy Statement. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual progression within a grade
and readiness to progress or to be promoted. Records of learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made
by teachers and learners in the teaching and learning process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools and other stakeholders. Learner
performance can be reported in several ways. These include report cards, parents’ meetings, school visitation days, parent-
teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters, etc. Teachers in all grades report in percentages against
the subject.

4.8.1 Recording and reporting in the first, second and third terms

Schools are required to provide quarterly feedback to parents on the Programme of Assessment using a formal reporting tool
such as a report card. The schedule and the report card should indicate the overall level of performance of a learner. The term
reporting will be based on the SBA and PAT tasks per term. The term mark will comprise of 25% PAT and 75% SBA for
each of terms 1 and 3. The term mark will comprise of 100% PAT for term 2.

4.8.2 Recording and reporting at the end of the academic year
At the end of the year the final mark will comprise of 25% SBA, 25% PAT and 50% Final Examinations. The weighting of tasks
in the Programme of Assessment must be strictly adhered to when calculating the final mark of the learner in grade 12, at the end
of the year.

4.9 MODERATION OF FORMAL ASSESSMENT

4.9.1 Moderation of SBA for grade 12

 175
 Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should be
implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation practices must be in
place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments. All formal tasks are internally/externally moderated. The subject head
or departmental head for Technical Sciences at the school will generally manage this process at the school level. SBA tasks
should be moderated at all levels (school/cluster/district/province/national).

4.9.2 Moderation of PAT for grade 12
Moderation of each term’s PAT component can be done as early as in the following term, i.e. experiment 1 can be moderated as
soon as the second term starts.

The moderation of the PAT should be onsite (face-to-face moderation). This onsite moderation should incorporate the
following process:
• During onsite (face-to-face) moderation learners may be selected at random to demonstrate the different skills developed
 while conducting the experiments.
• During onsite moderation a 10% random sample of learners may be selected and asked to conduct the PAT experiments
 and to answer questions based on them.
• Learners may not request or obtain assistance from other learners during moderation.
• The school must ensure that all apparatus for the PAT experiments are available and in working condition at school during
 moderation.
• Upon completion of the moderation process the moderator will, if necessary, adjust marks of the entire group upwards or
 downwards.
• Normal examination protocols for appeals will be adhered to.

APPENDIX 1

4.2.1 Assessment taxonomy for Technical Sciences

Appendix 1 provides a possible hierarchy of cognitive levels that must be used to ensure that tasks include opportunities for
learners to achieve at various levels of cognitive demand. The verbs given in the fifth column below could be useful when
formulating questions associated with the cognitive levels given in the first column.

 176
 APPENDIX 1: Assessment taxonomy for Technical Sciences

 DESCRIPTION OF SKILLS
 LEVEL EXPLANATION ACTION VERBS
 COGNITIVE DEMONSTRATED

 The learner creates new ideas and • Generating Devise, predict, invent, propose,
 information using the knowledge • Planning construct, generate, make,
 previously learned or at hand. At the • Producing develop, formulate, improve,
 extended abstract level, the learner • Designing plan, design, produce, forecast,
 makes connections not only within • Inventing compile, originate, imagine
 CREATING the given subject area but also • Devising

 beyond it and generalises and • Making

 transfers the principles and ideas
 underlying the specific instance. The

 4 learner works with relationships and
 abstract ideas.

 The learner makes decisions based • Checking Combine, integrate, modify,
 on in-depth reflection, criticism and • Hypothesising rearrange, substitute, compare,
 assessment. The learner works at • Critiquing prepare, generalise, rewrite,
 the extended abstract level. • Experimenting categorise, combine, compile,
 EVALUATING • Judging reconstruct, organise, justify,
 • Testing argue, prioritise, judge, rate,
 • Detecting validate, reject, appraise, judge,
 • Monitoring rank, decide, criticise

 The learner appreciates the • Organising Analyse, separate, order,
 significance of the parts in relation to • Comparing explain, connect, classify,
 the whole. Various aspects of the • Deconstructing arrange, divide, compare, select,
 knowledge become integrated, the • Attributing infer, break down, contrast,
 learner shows a deeper • Outlining distinguish, draw, illustrate,
 ANALYSING understanding and the ability to • Finding identify, outline, point out, relate,
 break down a whole into its • Structuring question, appraise, argue,
 component parts. Elements • Integrating defend, debate, criticise, probe,
 3
 embedded in a whole are identified examine, investigate, experiment
 and the relations among the
 elements are recognised.

 The learner has the ability to use (or • Implementing apply, demonstrate, calculate,
 apply) knowledge and skills in other • Carrying out complete, illustrate, show, solve,
 APPLYING familiar situations and new • Using examine, modify, relate, change,
 situations. • Executing classify, experiment, discover,

 177
 construct, manipulate, prepare,
 produce, draw, make, compile,
 compute, sequence, interpret

 The learner grasps the meaning of • Exemplifying summarise, describe, interpret,
 information by interpreting and • Comparing calculate, contrast, associate,
 translating what has been learned. • Explaining distinguish, estimate,
UNDERSTANDING 2 • Inferring differentiate, discuss, extend,
 • Classifying comprehend, convert, explain,
 give example, rewrite, infer,
 review, observe, give main idea

 The learner is able to recall, • Recognising list, define, tell, describe, identify,
 remember and restate facts and • Listing show, know, label, collect, select,
 other learned information. • Describing reproduce, match, recognise,
REMEMBERING 1 • Identifying examine, quote, name
 • Retrieving
 • Recalling
 • Naming

 178
 28. Tourism

4.3 Formal Assessment

4.3.1 The formal assessment requirements for Tourism

• Four formal theoretical (SBA) assessment tasks must be completed during the school year in Grade 12.
 This accounts for 25% of the total marks for the end-of-year assessment in Term 4.
• The four formal theoretical (SBA) assessment tasks are compulsory.
• The end-of-year assessment includes two parts: (1) A Practical Assessment Task (PAT) and (2) a written theory paper.
 Together these two parts make up the remaining 75% in Grade 12.
• Together, the three components constitute the end-of-year promotion mark of a 100%.
• In Grade 12 all SBA assessment Tasks are internally set, marked and moderated.
• The end-of-year NSC assessment (75%) in Grade 12 is externally set, marked and moderated.
• Each task must cater for a balanced range of cognitive levels as well as align to the prescribed range for levels of difficulty.
• An item and error analysis of learner performance must be completed after marking a formal assessment task. The purpose
 of the analysis is to expose a lack of knowledge and understanding or poorly developed skills. It further assists to identify
 the most suitable intervention strategy to improve the level of knowledge and understanding to improve learner
 performance.
• Assessment for the PAT is assessed internally by the teacher and Departmental Head responsible for Tourism.
 It is also moderated externally by the Subject Advisor / Provincial Subject Head.
• This process is verified externally by DBE/UMALUSI.

 Formal Assessment Grade 12

 SBA Term 1 SBA Term 2 SBA Term 3 Term 4: Promotion mark

 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 SBA
 March Controlled Test Tourism Skills Data-handling Task Term 1+2+3 = 300÷3 =
 Assessment
 Task Task 4 100
 Preparatory Examination PAT
 100
 Nov NSC Examination
 = 200

 100 100 100 100
** SBA = School based Assessment

 179
 In Grade 12 only one internal exam is compulsory. Schools may therefore:
• Write both exams; or
• Replace one of the exams with a test at the end of the term. This test will have the same weighting as the exam and must
 cover a substantial amount of work.

4.4 Types of Formal Assessment Tasks in Tourism for Grade 12

4.4.1 Tourism Skills Assessment Task

The Tourism Skills Assessment Task is an assessment task that requires the learner to demonstrate and apply understanding of:
(a) Soft Skills; (b) 21st Century skills and (c) Entrepreneurial Skills.
The scenario provided as an introduction for the task can be presented to the learner in the following formats:

• written text / visual text
• audio clip / video clip

To set the Tourism Assessment Skills Task for Grade 12, the teacher should:
• Set a task with a minimum total of 50 marks;
• Determine and indicate the skill/s to be assessed;
• Link the skill(s) to tourism specific content in Term 1;
• Select / create a scenario that is current and real;
• Select / create the scenario relevant to the identified skill/s and content covered in Term 1;
• Provide information about the skill/s and/or content;
• Develop the task with clear instructions;
• Develop an assessment tool with a clear breakdown of expected criteria and guidelines for the assessment.

Any of the following 21st Century Skills may be selected for the Tourism Skills Assessment Task:

 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12

 • customer service skills • customer service skills • customer service skills
 • communication skills • leadership skills • financial management skills
 • planning skills • generic management skills • human resource management skills
 • sales skills • digital skills • business administration skills
 • creativity/design skills • planning skills • price setting skills
 • problem solving skills • marketing skills • social media skills
 • critical thinking skills • management skills • budgeting skills
 • collaboration skills • entrepreneurial skills • tourism channel skills
 • digital skills • critical thinking skills • collaboration skills
 • entrepreneurial skills • collaboration skills • entrepreneurial skills
 • reading interpretation skills • teamwork • critical thinking skills
 • reading interpretation skills • reading interpretation skills

 180
 All the above skills as well as any additional skills required to provide a framework for strengthening of critical thinking as well as
technical skills.

4.4.2 Data Handling Task

Data handling is a source-based single-sitting assessment task, where learners engage with and analyse data, to include the
following skills:
• Collecting data
• Organising data
• Representing data
• Interpreting data
• Discussing data.

Data handling can be applied to any topic in the Grade 12 Tourism Teaching Plans covered in Terms 1, 2 and 3.
Various stimuli, containing statistics / data can be used as a source from where questions flow: Examples: Maps; case
studies; scenarios; extracts; pictures; cartoons; advertisements; flow-charts; tables; graphs; infographics; reports.

To set the Tourism Data Handling Task for Grades 12, the teacher should:
 Set a task with a minimum total of 50 marks;
 Select any suitable topic that links to data handling, from the content covered in the Teaching Plans for Terms 1, 2 and 3;
 Create or source relevant and preferably recent data/information;
 Give clear instructions to guide the learner on how to complete the task (The learner should know exactly what to do and
 what is expected.)
 Give clear assessment criteria for the learner to know exactly what is expected for the response.
 Develop a relevant assessment tool that aligns to the instructions and assessment criteria of the task.

4.4.3 Controlled Tests

A test for formal assessment may not comprise of a series of small tests and should cover a substantial amount of content.

Criteria for setting a question paper for a test in Grade 12
 • Set a test with a minimum total of 50 marks;
 • Minimum time allocated is 1 hour;
 • The first page of the test must include: The name of the school; the date; name of the subject; grade; time allocation;
 name and number of the SBA task; mark total; name of the examiner and moderator;
 • All test papers must be neatly typed;
 • All maps / graphics / illustrations should be print clear;
 • The question paper should be error free e.g. no spelling, language, translation or mark allocation errors are allowed;
 • It is compulsory for all tests to include TWO sections (Section A and B).

 181
 • It is compulsory to include scenario / case study-based questions that require:
 - Longer reflective responses in a paragraph format. (minimum 5 marks)
 - Higher order thinking skills that require substantiating evidence/motivations/arguments.
 - Source-based questions (maps, case studies, scenarios, extracts, pictures, cartoons, advertisements, flow-charts,
 tables, graphs, and infographics.)
 • Each test must cater for a balanced range of cognitive levels as well as align to the prescribed range for levels of difficulty.
 • An action verb is used to open the question. This gives a clear instruction for what is expected for the response.
 • An item and error analysis of learner performance must be completed after marking a formal assessment task. The
 purpose of the analysis is to expose a lack of knowledge and understanding or poorly developed skills. It further assists
 to identify the most suitable intervention strategy to improve the level of knowledge and understanding to improve learner
 performance.

 TEST: Minimum total - 50 marks

 Minimum marks Percentage
 SECTION A: Short questions
 15 marks 30%

 Include a variety of other short questions (Examples: Multiple choice; Pairing off items; Choose the correct word,
 Select the answer from a list; Crossword puzzles etc.) Note: NO true/false questions are allowed.
 Section A: Includes mostly one-mark questions. (More marks may be allocated to a question to align with the level
 of difficulty and /or cognitive demand of the question.)

 Minimum marks Percentage
 SECTION B: Long Questions
 35 marks 70%

Criteria for setting a Marking Guideline for tests in Grade 12

 • The first page must contain: The name of the school; the date; name of the subject; grade; time allocation; name and
 number of the SBA task; mark total; name of the examiner and moderator;
 • All marking guidelines must be neatly typed
 • No spelling, language or translation errors are allowed.
 • The numbering format must be correct and the numbering must align accurately with the question paper.
 • Indicate the mark allocation for each fact with a tick
 • Include all the alternative responses that are considered as correct answers on the Marking Guideline.

 182
 4.4.4 Examinations: Grade 12
All examinations should adhere to the specified layout indicated in the table below.
Grade 12 Trial and Final NSC Examination layout

 Content Grade 12

Total: 200 marks Duration: 3 hours

 Section A Short Questions (All Topics) 40

 Section B Map Work and Tour Planning; Foreign Exchange 50

 Section C Tourism Attractions; Cultural and Heritage Tourism; Marketing 50

 Section D Tourism Sectors; Sustainable and Responsible Tourism 30

 Section E Domestic, Regional and International Tourism; Communication and Customer 30
 Care

 TOTAL 200

4.4.5 Practical Assessment Task (PAT)

The Practical Assessment Task is a compulsory component of Tourism and contributes towards the final promotion mark.
• The PAT for Grade 12 is set externally every year.
• Provinces and schools may not adapt or retype any part of the task or use a task from a previous year.
• Foundational content and skills from Grades 10 and 11 may be included for assessment in the Grade 12 PAT.
• The Practical Assessment Task keeps abreast with and includes current trends and changes in the Tourism industry.
• A Grade 12 PAT Resource and Mediation Pack is provided.
 The package for the grade 12 Tourism PAT includes (a) Clear guidelines for the implementation of the task, (b) The PAT
 task with clear assessment criteria, (c) An Assessment Instrument, (d) A Resource Pack and (d) A Mediation Pack for
 teachers (Instructional information to standardise the mediation and implementation of the task.)
• The PAT is administered under controlled, examination conditions.
 • The PAT is conducted in an 8-hour session, that is broken down into two four (4) hour sessions spread over two (2)
 days. Each four (4) hour session may be broken down into two (2) hour sessions with a short break in between the two
 sessions. Both sessions should take place in the second term.
• All PAT assessment should be fully completed by the end of the second term.
• Candidates not attending the PAT session: With or without a valid reason will be dealt with in accordance to the National
 Protocol for Assessment (NPA) paragraphs 4B(f)(ii), 6(4)(a)(ii), 8(1), 8(4), 8(5), 8(6), 8(7), 9(2), 10(3),
 14(1)(b),14(1)(d),14(1)(e) and the National Policy pertaining to the Programme and Promotion Requirements (NPPPR)
 paragraph 29(1).

 183
 The PAT package includes:
(A) The Mediation and Information pack for teachers

Purpose:
• Guides and sets the standard for how learner preparation for the task is to be done.
• Familiarises with the expected format, scope and criteria to ensure the learner is prepared effectively for the implement of
 the task.

(B) The PAT task and Resource Pack for learners
• The PAT Task is prepared per learner for each session on Day 1 and 2.
• Two sessions consisting of two hours each will be conducted on each day of Day 1 and 2.
• The Resource Pack includes resources to complete the tasks on Day 1 and 2 of the current academic year.

A PAT package includes:
 • The assessment task with clear instructions and assessment criteria.
 • Clear implementation guidelines for both the teacher and the learner;
 • A Resource Pack for the learner (All the basic resources required to complete the PAT)
 • An Assessment Tool to guide and standardise assessment;
 • A Marking Guideline;
 • Mediation resources to standardise the interpretation and implementation of the task.
 • A Moderation Tool for all levels of moderation;
 • An Attendance Register for learners and invigilators.

4.5 Moderation of assessment

4.5.1 School based Assessment Tasks (SBA)
• All Grades 12 SBA tasks are moderated internally.
• It is compulsory for the Subject Advisor to moderate a sample of the SBA tasks during school visits, to verify the standard
 of internal moderation as well as to quality assure the standard and accuracy of assessment.
• It is compulsory for SBA tasks to be moderated at all Levels of Moderation: School/ District/ Provincial.
• Grade 12 SBA tasks are also moderated externally at National level by DBE and Umalusi.

4.5.2 Practical assessment Tasks (PAT)

• A Moderation tool is included in the Mediation and Information Resource Pack. This tool is used to prepare the
 Moderation Report, but also serves to standardise the moderation process.
• It is compulsory for the Subject Advisor to moderate a sample of PAT tasks during school visits, to verify the
 standard of internal moderation.
• The quality of the PAT will be approved by the Subject Advisor/ Provincial Subject Head to standardise the
 quality of assessment.
• It is compulsory for PAT tasks to be moderated at all Levels of Moderation: School/ District/ Provincial.
• Grade 12 tasks are also moderated externally at National level by DBE and Umalusi.

 184
 183