GUIDELINES FOR RESPONDING TO LEARNER

 National Curriculum Statement (NCS)
DIVERSITY IN THE CLASSROOM | English

 Curriculum Assessment
 Policy Statement

 Grades R - 12
 ii GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 GUIDELINES FOR RESPONDING TO LEARNER DIVERSITY IN THE CLASSROOM
 THROUGH CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS
 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM through
curriculum and assessment policy statements 2011

Directorate Inclusive Education

Department of Basic Education

Private Bag X895
Pretoria 0001
(012) 354 4094
Fax (012) 323 7749
www.education.gov.za
www.thutong.doe.gov.za/InclusiveEducation

 iv GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

2. Understanding Diversity in the Classroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

3. Responding to Diversity through the Curriculum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

4. What is Curriculum Differentiation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

 4.1 Differentiating curriculum content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

 4.2 Differentiating the learning environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

 4.3 Differentiating teaching methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

5. Differentiating Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

6. How do we Analyse, Record and Report on Assessment? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

7. Accessing Support for Curriculum Differentiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

Glossary of terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

Useful websites for curriculum differentiation resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

Appendices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

 Appendix 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

 Appendix 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

 Appendix 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

 Appendix 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39

CAPS 1
 1. INTRODUCTION

In July 2001, the Ministry of Education published Education White Paper 6 - Special Needs Education: Building
an Inclusive Education and Training System which commits the state to the achievement of equality, non-
discrimination and the maximum participation of all learners in the education system as a whole. Education
White Paper 6 makes it an imperative that the education and training system must change to accommodate the
full range of learning needs, with particular attention to strategies for instructional and curriculum transformation
(Department of Education, 2001 p. 11). These principles also underlie the new Curriculum and Assessment
Policy Statement (CAPS).

One of the most significant barriers to learning is the school curriculum. Barriers to learning arise from the
different aspects of the curriculum such as the content, the language, classroom organisation, teaching
methodologies, pace of teaching and time available to complete the curriculum, teaching and learning support
materials and assessment (Department of Education, 2001, p.19). In responding to the diversity of learner
needs in the classroom, it is imperative to ensure differentiation in curriculum delivery to enable access to
learning for all learners. All schools are required to offer the same curriculum to learners while simultaneously
ensuring variations in mode of delivery and assessment processes to accommodate all learners. Respecting
diversity implies a belief that all learners have the potential to learn.

What is the purpose of the guidelines?

These guidelines are intended to provide teachers, principals, subject advisors, administrators, school
governors and other personnel, parameters and strategies on how to respond to learner diversity in the
classrooms through the curriculum. They can be used for school based teacher development by the Institution
Level Support Teams and District Based Support Teams. The guidelines are a critical and integral component
of all NCS training initiatives. More specifically, the guidelines have been developed to facilitate and support
curriculum differentiation in the classroom.

Even though learning the components and strategies of curriculum differentiation may be seen by some
teachers as complex and overwhelming at first, it is however important to take the first step. With time,
teachers will find that after experimenting with strategies in this guide, they could create their own innovative
strategies. Curriculum differentiation is about thinking about teaching and learning in new and different ways.
It is about innovation rather than a recipe. Thus it continually evolves/develops.

How are the guidelines presented?

The guidelines comprise the following sections:

 Understanding diversity in the classroom

 Responding to diversity through the curriculum

 Differentiating the curriculum

 Analysing, recording and reporting on assessment

 Accessing support for curriculum differentiation

 2 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 2. UNDERSTANDING DIVERSITY IN THE CLASSROOM

We are all aware that the South African schools have a wide range of learners from different backgrounds.
Educators and learners should value, embrace and make positive use of the differences.

What does learner diversity mean?

Having a diverse group of learners simply means recognising that people are unique in their own way. When
we look into our classrooms we will observe that there are learners from different socio-economic, language,
cultural, religious, ethnic, racial, gender, sexual orientation, ability groups etc. All these learners come to school
with different experiences. We therefore can see that we have rich diversity in the learner population.

Why should we learn about diversity?

 Many schools act as if all learners are the same.

 Many schools operate with an evaluation system that rewards only a certain number of abilities.

 This often gives rise to an early and mistaken separation of those considered ‘bright’ and those considered
 not intelligent.

What are some of the diverse learning needs of learners?

In all classrooms learners have diverse learning needs. If teachers are not responsive to these needs and
provide the necessary support learners may experience barriers to learning. For example

 Learners who have difficulty in reading and writing;

 Learners with hearing, visual and coordination difficulties;

 Learners living in poverty;

 Learners with health and emotional difficulties;

 Learners experiencing difficulties in remembering what has been taught to them and

 Learners who need assistive devices and adapted materials such as Braille.

CAPS 3
 3. RESPONDING TO DIVERSITY THROUGH THE CURRICULUM

As teachers we have an important responsibility in making sure that all learners from whatever background
feel included and affirmed in the classroom. We should monitor our own beliefs, attitudes and behaviours when
responding to our learners. Some of the ways in which we can do this are:

 Recognizing any biases or stereotypes we may have absorbed.

 Treating each learner as an individual, and respecting each learner for whom he or she is.

 Avoiding use of language that is biased and undermines certain groups of learners.

 Refraining from remarks that make assumptions about our learner experiences.

 Considering the unique needs of learners when designing learning programmes and lessons.

 Constantly re-evaluating our methods for teaching and assessing learners in a diverse setting.

 Considering different approaches, methodologies and strategies when teaching in our classroom.

 Creating opportunities for all learners to participate in activities.

 Every teacher needs to understand that the most significant way to respond to learner diversity in the
 classroom is through the curriculum. The NCS sets the content of what is to be taught, but it is up to the
 teachers to plan how they will teach it to different learners in the classroom. One of the key strategies for
 responding to diversity is curriculum differentiation.

4 WHAT IS CURRICULUM DIFFERENTIATION?

Curriculum differentiation is a key strategy for responding to the needs of learners with diverse learning
styles and needs. It involves processes of modifying, changing, adapting, extending, and varying teaching
methodologies, teaching strategies, assessment strategies and the content of the curriculum. It takes into
account learners’ ability levels, interests and backgrounds. Curriculum differentiation can be done at the level
of content, teaching methodologies, assessment and learning environment. Each of these levels will be
discussed below.

4.1 Differentiating curriculum content

An important aspect to be differentiated in the curriculum is the content. This can be done by adapting the
content of the curriculum in such a way that it is manageable for a wider range of learners. This should not
be seen as a watering down of the curriculum but rather as a graded process where learners are taken by a
different route to a similar endpoint. Some learners require an advanced level of content and others may still
be grappling with what is being taught in the grade.

What is curriculum content?

Content is what we teach and what the learner is expected to learn, that is, to know, understand or be able to
do. It includes facts, concepts, and skills that learners will acquire within their learning environment. Sometimes
teachers are able to select the content to suit the learners’ needs. Sometimes it is the authority of the school
that prescribes the content of the curriculum; and sometimes it is a combination of teacher and authority.

 4 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Because of curriculum demands and time constraints, it is often a challenge for the teachers to select content
which is based on:

 being meaningful,
 learners’ needs and interests,
 the environment,
 more than just learning facts, and

 learners’ current levels of functioning

In curriculum differentiation, teachers are encouraged to modify the content to some extent to help learners
reach the attain knowledge, skills and competencies. Before we make decisions on how we are going to teach,
and what we need to modify, we first need to identify the content.

 Scenario 1
 In Mrs. Kichwa’s new class, she is working on the skill of reading and understanding the text. Mrs.
 Kichwa has planned her lesson so that most of the learners in her class will be able to answer the
 questions, “What is the title of the book?” “Who is the author?” She also asks, “What is the colour
 of the book cover?” “What do you see on the cover of this book?” and, after a learner gives the
 title of the book, Mrs. Kichwa asks, “Who do you think is the main character in this book?” She has
 modified the content by asking these additional questions so that all the learners can participate in
 the lesson and begin to gain an understanding of “reading the text. »

Why do we differentiate the content?

We differentiate for a number of different reasons, for example:

 To provide access to learning
 To provide success experiences to all learners
 To motivate learners and build self esteem

 To promote effective learning for all learners

At what levels do we differentiate the content?

 Abstractness: In any curriculum we have facts, definitions, descriptions, patterns, relationships, key
 concepts and generalisations. Example: Depending on learners’ levels of functioning, they might access
 the content at a concrete or abstract level. Certain learners might need to work with objects, such as small
 stones as counters before they are ready to work with abstract numbers. It is the responsibility of the
 teacher to ensure that the content is adapted at the level of individual learner. We cannot assume that all
 learners can learn easily at an abstract level.

 Complexity: Many aspects of the curriculum can be very complex and difficult to understand for some
 learners. For example, understanding the different characters in a story is a more complex task than just
 relating the plot of the story. We also need to contextualise topics rather than using facts in isolation.

 Variety: To cater for learners’ levels of functioning and their interests we need to expand the curriculum.
 For example, a child who has excellent reading skills might be given new and varied material to stop them
 from getting bored.

CAPS 5
 Stop and think!

How can I cater for all ability levels in my class?

Multi-level teaching is one strategy. You can introduce the target concept to the whole class first. Throughout
the presentation of the target concept during the lesson, the teacher at different times lowers and raises
instruction to keep the below level and above-level learners interested. This shows that the teacher is catering
for the different abilities. When assigning a task, the teacher will split learners into separate groups according
to their different levels. Learners’ tasks may be levelled according to their interests, proﬁciency and language
skill. The teacher will end the lesson with the whole class together in the application stage of the lesson.

 Figure 1: Multilevel teaching

 Scenario 2

 Mrs Sibaya wants the grade 3 learners to explore the transport system in the area of the school. The whole
 class was required to undertake research by standing at a busy intersection and recording the number
 of different vehicles that pass through in a one hour time frame. Learners were then asked to record the
 information. Learners who are at a lower skill level had to draw a picture of what they observed at the
 intersection. Average learners were required to record their findings systematically in a table format. An
 advanced group of learners were asked to write a report of their findings, and research the implications for
 addressing traffic overload at the intersection. Learners at the lower skill level were required to write a few
 words or one sentence to go along with their pictures. Mrs Sibaya attempted to vary the task to suit the
 writing skill levels and interest levels of her learners.

In Appendix 1 you will find examples of lesson plans which show how particular lessons can be differentiated
to meet the needs of all learners in a class.

4.2 Differentiating the learning environment

The learning environment in which our learners work can create barriers to learning. It is our responsibility
as teachers to make sure that we make the learning environment as conducive to learning as possible.
Differentiation at this level is important.

What is the learning environment?

A learning environment is a place or a setting where learning occurs. It does not refer only to a physical
classroom but also includes the characteristics of the setting. Two key dimensions of the learning environment
are the psychosocial and the physical. These will be discussed below.

The psychosocial learning environment covers psychological and social factors that have consequences
for satisfaction, health, well being and ability to perform effectively. This includes:

 interpersonal cooperation;

 classroom and school culture;

 protection against harassment and mental harm and

 effective communication.

 6 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 The physical environment includes factors such as classroom spaces, classroom infrastructure, arrangement
of furniture, level of noise, class size, classroom displays and resources. It is critical for teachers to consider
these factors when trying to meet the learning needs of their learners.

How do we differentiate the learning environment?

We can do this by paying attention to the psychological, social and physical factors that shape the learning
environment. Both psychosocial and physical aspects of the learning environment impact on learners
classroom experiences. In a large class, a hearing impaired child or those who struggle to concentrate may
experience barriers to learning because of noise levels and seating arrangements. The teacher would have to
observe and adapt the curriculum to suit the needs of this learner.

Let us read the case study below to further examine the psychosocial learning environment.

Mala used to live with both her parents in one of the provinces in South Africa. Both her parents are living with
HIV. However, when her parents separated, her mother moved to Cape Town. Mala now lives there with her
mother in a very poor and densely populated suburb. Mala’s father still lives in another province and rarely
sees his daughter. Her mother has a sleep-in job as a domestic worker. She rents a small room in the back
yard of relative strangers. Mala stays alone in this room during the week. Her mother has arranged for her
meals to be provided by the landlord. Her mother returns home at the weekends.

 Stop and think!

 How would the teacher accommodate the psychosocial needs of this learner when planning her lessons?

 Think about a similar child in your class. Describe how you would adapt the psychosocial environment in
 the classroom to respond to her needs.

Consider the following strategies for differentiating the learning environment for Mala.

 Get to know her well. You might ask yourself: What is this child afraid of? Is there anything he or she is
 angry about? When is this child disruptive? When does she become quiet and withdrawn? What does she
 like to do? What makes this child feel safe and happy in the world? What support does she have at home?

 Give her a chance to express herself and speak about her feelings.

 Listen carefully so that she knows that their feelings are important.

 Show her to express their feelings through drawing, writing, dancing or music. Physical movement is
 especially good for expressing anger.

 Encourage caring relationships among learners.

 Make her feel that her interests, input and ideas are valued.

 Encourage her to be independent.

 Create a safe environment in which she can take risks.

Now read the story of Brenda below which shows how we may have to differentiate the physical
environment for learners with a disability to ensure that they do not experience barriers to learning.

CAPS 7
 Case Study

Brenda was born blind. She grew up in a town that had a school for visually impaired learners where could at-
tend primary school. She is a bright girl and achieved high marks throughout. When it was time for her to attend
high school, her parents could not afford to send her to a boarding school catering for partially sighted children
in Johannesburg. The local high school, however, was willing to accept her and the SGB even earmarked
funds for the adaptation of the school to accommodate Brenda and other learners like her.

In addressing the needs of Brenda, the teacher consulted the local branch of the South African National Coun-
cil for the Blind to obtain technical advice on the first steps that the teacher could take to adapt the classroom
and school environment to accommodate Brenda’s needs. With modifications to the physical environment,
such as the arrangement of the classroom furniture and provision of a spacious desk on which to place her
equipment, and through her orientation to the environment within and around the classroom, Brenda could
successfully complete her schooling in an ordinary school.

 Stop and think!

Adaptations that might be needed for Brenda could include the following:

 Arrangement of furniture so as to allow clear passage to the desk and other facilities is of paramount
 importance for a blind learner.

 Ensure the child knows her way around the school and the classroom. Teachers and sighted pupils should
 lead one step ahead with the visually impaired learner holding on to the guide’s elbow. Warn them of
 obstacles such as steps and narrow doorways.

 In an inclusive class all steps taken to accommodate a learner should be done with sensitivity so as not to
 embarrass the learner. Adaptations must be seen as part of the normal routine of the teacher and learners.

4.3 Differentiating teaching methods

As we have noted earlier, we are dealing with a diverse group of learners. This means that teachers need to
find ways that ensure participation of all learners in learning.

Why do we differentiate teaching methods?

We as teachers are aware that children come to our classes with different abilities, skills and knowledge, socio-
economic backgrounds and personalities. In order to respond to their diverse needs we need to differentiate
our teaching methods and strategies. The critical questions that we need to ask ourselves are:

 How can we manage classrooms where learners are working at different levels of knowledge?

 How can we ensure that all learners are engaged in meaningful activities?

What aspects of our teaching methods do we differentiate?

The key to differentiated teaching methods is the flexible use by teachers of a wide range of:

 Learning materials

 8 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
  Methods of presentation

 Learning activities

 Lesson organisations

How do we differentiate our teaching methods?

Learning materials

 We can provide learners with a wide range of materials that cater for different abilities, interests and learning
 styles. Electronic learning, or e-learning, offers a range of options for differentiated instruction that must be
 tailored by the teacher to meet learner needs.

 We can provide learners with a range of graded materials.

 We need to be aware that these materials might need to be adapted for learners with disabilities. For
 example, a child with poor vision might need larger print to be able to read easily. A child with an intellectual
 disability might benefit from the use of pictures in the learning materials.

Methods of presentation.

We need to user a wide range of teaching methods or strategies to cater for the diverse needs of learners.
We can also modify the format in which the task is presented, e.g. the complexity of graphs, diagrams, tables,
illustrations, cartoons, etc. A range of strategies can be followed to make these accessible to learners who
experience barriers to learning of whatever nature, such as:

 Picture or diagram simplified or shown differently without compromising complexity of question

 Picture or diagram replaced by written description

 Picture or diagram supplemented by written explanation

 Picture or diagram replaced with a real item or model

 Unnecessary picture or diagram removed

 Amount of information reduced

 Inherently visual material replaced with equivalent non-visual material

Other methods could include:

 Scaffolding: Learners with diverse learning needs usually have difficulty working independently and may
 require extensive initial guidance. Scaffolding refers to the personal guidance, assistance, and support
 that a teacher, peer, or task provides to a learner.

 Example
 Teachers can convert independent writing activities to group activities, wherein learners support one
 another. Teachers can also temporarily simplify writing tasks, such as using proofreading exercises.
 Teachers can provide some direction to help the child focus on achieving the goal to reduce frustration.
 Teachers can model and clearly define the expectations of the activity to be performed.

 Flexible grouping: Groups can be used for different purposes and teachers should take care that a
 child does not get labelled as belonging only to one group (Please note we do not seat learners in ability

CAPS 9
 groups!). They will be in different groups according to the task at hand. Below are some groupings that can
 help where the content can be differentiated.

 Enhanced / enriched learning allows knowledge, concepts and skills to be attained on an advanced level.
 The knowledge concepts and specific skills of the specific grade are expanded;

 Unmodified learning concerns age/grade appropriate knowledge, concepts and skills. Here learning allows
 for the attainment of grade appropriate knowledge, concepts and skills;

 Unwinding/scaffolding learning involves knowledge, concepts and skills being grouped and structured.
 Learning support allows for scaffolding by breaking down the task into steps and going one step at a time.
 This is also called designing down.

 Straddled learning relates to learners working on the same thematic knowledge, concepts and skills, but at
 a lower grade/phase level. Learning can be attained on a lower grade/phase level.

 (Refer to appendix 2 for more information on grouping learners)

Learning activities.

Learning should be facilitated through the planning of diverse teaching/learning activities that cater for the
diverse learning support needs of all the learners in the classroom. Learning and teaching should be structured
to create access to activities that will create opportunities.

 Example

 Tiered assignments are one of the strategies that we can use to differentiate learning activities.
 This strategy provides varied levels of activities and assignments to ensure that learners explore and
 practice concepts at a level that builds on their prior knowledge and that prompts continued growth rather
 than repetition of prior knowledge.

 We can also modify the format in which the task is presented, e.g. the complexity of graphs, diagrams,
 tables, illustrations, cartoons, etc. A range of strategies can be followed to make these accessible to learners
 who experience barriers to learning of whatever nature, such as:
 o Picture or diagram simplified or shown differently without compromising complexity of question
 o Picture or diagram replaced by written description
 o Picture or diagram supplemented by written explanation
 o Picture or diagram replaced with a real item or model
 o Unnecessary picture or diagram removed
 o Amount of information reduced
 o Inherently visual material replaced with equivalent non-visual material

Lesson organisations.

The best way to meet pupil’s different learning needs is to organise lessons in a number of different ways.
This means that we need to differentiate the manner in which activities are planned and organised in a lesson.
This ensures the maximum involvement and participation of all learners in the lesson. Adaptations are made
to the types of activities presented to the learners and this should be based on their readiness, developmental
levels, interests, backgrounds and learning profiles. One of the ways of doing this is to think about multiple
intelligences and recognise that we all learn in different ways.

 10 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Stop and think!

 Catering for multiple intelligences in the classroom

 No two learners are alike. They each have different attributes, different ways of knowing and of expressing
 knowledge. Howard Gardiner identified and labelled these as “intelligences”. In planning lessons, the
 teacher has to consider the range of activities related to the content of the lesson and the skills learners
 have to master. This will provide a range of opportunities in order to respond to learners’ different strengths
 and learning styles. These can be approached by seeking to answer the following questions:

  Logical-mathematical: How can I include the use of numbers, classification, critical thinking and
 calculations?

  Spatial: How can I include pictures and diagrams, colours, art or graphs?

  Intrapersonal: How can I include private learning time and choice?

  Interpersonal: How can I include group work, peer sharing and discussions?

  Bodily-kinaesthetic: How can I include movement, practical apparatus, drama or art and craft?

  Musical: How can I include music, sounds, rhyme, rhythms and dance?

  Verbal-linguistic: How can I include reading, writing and speaking?
 (Pritchard, 2009, p. 35).

Depicted in Figure 2 below is an example of how a teacher accommodates multiple intelligences in a lesson
on volcanoes

Figure 3: Demonstrating the understanding of volcanoes through multiple intelligences

(adapted from Noble, 2004: 195)

You can refer to Appendix 3 for more information on how to assess a learner’s multiple intelligences.

CAPS 11
 5. DIFFERENTIATING ASSESSMENT

Within a differentiated curriculum, assessment of learners and their learning is integral to the teaching and
learning process. As with differentiated instruction, differentiated assessment is based on the thinking that the
needs of learners cannot all be met in the same way

What are the main purposes of assessment?

Assessment serves three key purposes:

 To inform instructional planning;

 To inform instruction;

 To evaluate effectiveness of teaching for all learners;

 To assess learning;

 To identify learner needs and strengths and

 To evaluate learner achievement against predetermined criteria for the purposes of grading and reporting.

What are key principles for assessment in a diverse classroom?

 We should have high expectations for all learners.

 Every learner should have access to the standard of assessment best suited to his needs.

 No learner will be disadvantaged by the assessment strategy.

 Teachers are accountable for children’s achievement.

 Assessment informs us tell us about what the child can do at a particular stage.

 Assessment informs us about what support a learner needs to progress to another level.

 Every child can show what knowledge and skills he or she has learned in creative ways.

 Assessment should be authentic and make provision for multiple abilities, learning styles and levels.

 Assessment is supportive teaching practices.

 Assessment should be integrated in teaching and learning process.

 All learners can be accommodated within the flexible framework of the NCS.

 The learner’s abilities determine what will be expected from him/her.

What do we assess?

Assessing to find out about readiness and learner pre-skills

 How much prior knowledge or experience do learners have?

 What level of achievement and readiness do learners have?

 Are any learners missing the skills or understandings they need to learn

 this material?

 Will learners need help to overcome any misconceptions or gaps in knowledge about the topic?

 12 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Assessing progress with the curriculum

 Are learners learning what they were taught?

 Are they at the right entry point to ‘grasp’ the content worked on in the classroom?

 Are they practicing and performing as expected?

 Are they applying the facts, concepts and/or skills being learned

Assessing learner Interests

 Are they showing interest in a new topic or area of study?

 Are they sharing their interests with others?

 Are learners engaged in the lessons and activities?

Assessing learner characteristics

 What are their preferred learning styles (e.g., whole class teaching or pair work)?

 What are their responses to the materials?

 What are their responses to the difficulty level of instruction?

 What are their responses to the pacing of instruction?

 What are their responses to the learning environment?

What is differentiated assessment?

Differentiating assessment involves rethinking the traditional practice of having all learners do the same
assessment tasks at the same time. In this new way of thinking, teachers need an assessment approach and
plan that is flexible enough to accommodate a range of learner needs.

Why differentiated assessment?

Differentiated assessment will enable learners of various abilities and with varied experience to best
demonstrate what they know.

How do we differentiate assessment?

As a teacher gets to know her learners, and as learner differences emerge, assessment needs to become
more differentiated. The goal is to meet learners where they are and to help them progress to the next step in
their learning. Thus it is a cyclical process: assessment and instruction support and inform each other.

Figure 4: Differentiated Assessment process (Department of Education, Alberta, 2007)

CAPS 13
 These are some of the procedures that teachers can follow when differentiating assessment:

 Design assessment tasks which would allow for different learning styles or intelligences

 Allow for group assessment tasks.

 Pace or scaffold the assessment activities

 Allow for tests and assignments to be taken orally as well as in written form

 Give multiple-choice options

 Provide tasks which require short answers for certain learners

 Allow learners extra time to complete the task

 Use technology, aids or other special arrangements to undertake assessment tasks

 Keep a record of materials and assessment tasks used

 Keep teachers observation books for certain learners who need additional support

 Focus only on key concepts for certain learners

 Focus on the positive aspects or talents of the learners.

 Vary assessment activities.

 Exclude some marks collected early in the semester for a learner who performed poorly at the beginning of
 the year but subsequently made good progress.

 Examples

 Learners can demonstrate their learning by writing, making, doing and saying; within these four modalities
 there are many possibilities for different kinds of expression and production. Think variety of options for
 learner products, projects and learning tasks.

 o Writing: point form, mind maps, outline, graphic organizer, sentence, paragraph, structured
 passage. Some learners in a class may choose to demonstrate their learning by
 writing a report, while others choose to create a poster, and still others choose an oral
 presentation.

 o Making: sketch, visual portrayal, model.

 o Doing: performance, demonstration of skill, routine, procedure, decision making, problem solving.

 o Saying: discussing, debating, conferencing, skit, role-play.

 Stop and Think!!

In section 4 above, we saw how the idea of multiple intelligences can inform our teaching methods and
strategies. Here we ask: How can a teacher use the idea of multiple intelligences as a framework for
assessment so that our assessment tasks and strategies are responsive to the different learning styles of our
learners.

 14 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
  discover and manipulate materials (bodily-kinaesthetic).

 present an oral story illustrating new information in context (verbal-linguistic)

 introduce new terms in a flow chart or mind map (logical-mathematical)

 complete a piece of creative writing on a topic (verbal-linguistic)

 turn to a peer and discuss (interpersonal)

 draw a diagram to depict the information (visual)

 write journal entries from a particular point of view (intrapersonal)

 role-play a possible scenario (bodily-kinaesthetic)

 write a children’s book about the topic (verbal-linguistic).

The scenarios below show us how differentiated assessment can be done.

Scenario 3

Mark’s ability to problem solve in mathematics is quite strong. However, his ability to perform mental arithmetic
is weak. After thinking about this and observing Mark, his

teacher excludes the requirement to use mental arithmetic when assessing problem solving. She allowed him
to use a calculator. Mark was now better able to demonstrate his good problem-solving skills

Scenario 4

Mrs Dlamini found that in her class some learners knew the details or had the vocabulary but did not understand
some key concepts in science. She also found that others had good general knowledge, but also had significant
misconceptions. She decided to use a range of question types, from knowledge and recall to evaluation and
even speculation, to allow a range of learners’ understanding to emerge. This would give her an indication of
where they are and how to help them. Open-ended questions, such as “Write what you know about…” allowed
more learners to respond in a variety of ways. She found that this approach helped her understand individual
needs and plan her teaching to cater for the levels of understanding of all learner needs.

Below is a useful classification framework that we can use to differentiate assessment. Bloom’s Taxonomy
reflects a spectrum of task difficulty. It goes from easy tasks such as recalling knowledge to harder tasks such
as evaluating an argument.

Table 1: Bloom’s taxonomy (Adapted from Dalton & Smith, 1986)

CAPS 15
 Knowledge

 Useful
 Sample Question Stems Potential activities and products
 Verbs
 tell What happened after...? Make a list of the main events...
 list How many...? Make a timeline of events.
 describe Who was it that...? Make a facts chart.
 relate Can you name the...? Write a list of any pieces of information you can remember.
 locate Describe what happened at...? List all the .... in the story.
 write Who spoke to...? Make a chart showing...
 find Can you tell why...? Recite a poem.
 state Find the meaning of...?
 name What is...?
 Which is true or false...?

Comprehension

 Useful
 Sample Question Stems Potential activities and products
 Verbs
 Explain Can you write in your own words...? Cut out or draw pictures to show a particular event.
 Interpret Can you write a brief outline...? Illustrate what you think the main idea was.
 Outline What do you think could have Make a cartoon strip showing the sequence of events.
 Discuss happened next...? Write and perform a play based on the story.
 Distinguish Who do you think...? Retell the story in your words.
 Predict What was the main idea...? Paint a picture of some aspect you like.
 Restate Who was the key character...? Write a summary report of an event.
 Translate Can you distinguish between...? Prepare a flow chart to illustrate the sequence of events.
 Compare What differences exist between...? Make a colouring book.
 describe Can you provide an example of
 what you mean...?
 Can you provide a definition for...?

 16 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Application

 Useful
 Sample Question Stems Potential activities and products
 Verbs
 Solve Do you know another instance Construct a model to demonstrate how it will work.
 Show where...? Make a diorama to illustrate an important event.
 Use Could this have happened in...? Make a scrapbook about the areas of study.
 Illustrate Can you group by characteristics such Make a paper-mache map to include relevant information
 Construct as...? about an event.
 Complete What factors would you change if...? Take a collection of photographs to demonstrate a
 Examine Can you apply the method used to particular point.
 classify some experience of your own...? Make up a puzzle game suing the ideas from the study
 What questions would you ask of...? area.
 From the information given, can you Make a clay model of an item in the material.
 develop a set of instructions about...? Design a market strategy for your product using a known
 Would this information be useful if you strategy as a model.
 had a ...? Dress a doll in national costume.
 Paint a mural using the same materials.
 Write a textbook about... for others.

Analysis

 Useful
 Sample Question Stems Potential activities and products
 Verbs
 Analyse Which events could have Design a questionnaire to gather information.
 Distinguish happened...? Write a commercial to sell a new product.
 Examine I ... happened, what might the Conduct an investigation to produce information to support a
 Compare ending have been? view.
 Contrast How was this similar to...? Make a flow chart to show the critical stages.
 Investigate What was the underlying theme Construct a graph to illustrate selected information.
 Categorise of...? Make a jigsaw puzzle.
 Identify What do you see as other Make a family tree showing relationships.
 Explain possible goals? Put on a play about the study area.
 Separate Why did ... changes occur? Write a biography of the study person.
 advertise Can you compare your ... with Prepare a report about the area of study.
 that presented in...? Arrange a party. Make all the arrangements and record the
 Can you explain what must have steps needed.
 happened when...? Review a work of art in terms of form, colour and texture.
 How is ... similar to ...?
 What are some of the problems
 of...?
 Can you distinguish between...?
 What were some of the motives
 behind...?
 What was the turning point in the
 game?
 What was the problem with...?

CAPS 17
 Synthesis

 Useful
 Sample Question Stems Potential activities and products
 Verbs
 Create Can you design a ... to ...? Invent a machine to do a specific task.
 Invent Why not compose a song Design a building to house your study.
 Compose about...? Create a new product. Give it a name and plan a marketing
 Predict Can you see a possible solution campaign.
 Plan to...? Write about your feelings in relation to...
 Construct If you had access to all Write a TV show, play, puppet show, role play, song or
 Design resources how would you deal pantomime about...?
 Imagine with...? Design a record, book, or magazine cover for...?
 Propose Why don’t you devise your own Make up a new language code and write material suing it.
 Devise way to deal with...? Sell an idea.
 formulate What would happen if...? Devise a way to...
 How many ways can you...? Compose a rhythm or put new words to a known melody.
 Can you create new and unusual
 uses for...?
 Can you write a new recipe for a
 tasty dish?
 can you develop a proposal
 which would...?

Evaluation

 Useful Verbs Sample Question Stems Potential activities and products
 judge Is there a better solution to... Prepare a list of criteria to judge a ... show. Indicate priority
 select Judge the value of... and ratings.
 choose Can you defend your position Conduct a debate about an issue of special interest.
 decide about...? Make a booklet about 5 rules you see as important.
 justify Do you think ... is a good or a Convince others.
 debate bad thing? Form a panel to discuss views, e.g. “Learning at School.”
 verify How would you have handled...? Write a letter to ... advising on changes needed at...
 argue What changes to ... would you Write a half yearly report.
 recommend recommend? Prepare a case to present your view about...
 assess Do you believe?
 discuss Are you a ... person?
 rate How would you feel if...?
 prioritise How effective are...?
 determine What do you think about...?

What are alternate forms of assessment for learners experiencing barriers to learning (including
learners with disabilities) within the NCS?

Teachers might find that there are certain learners for whom a different or alternate form of assessment is
called for. The National Protocol for Recording and Reporting (Grades R – 12)

(Department of Education, 2011) allows for three key types of alternate assessment that can be used to assess
learners experiencing barriers to learning, including learners with disabilities.

 18 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
  Alternate Assessments Based on Alternate Attainment of Knowledge (content, concepts and
 skills) for learners with a significant cognitive disability. These assessments are based on the grade-
 level content covered by the general assessment, but at reduced depth, breadth, and complexity. These
 assessments describe achievement based on what is determined as a high expectation for these learners.
 Target learners can include learners with intellectual disability some of who are currently enrolled in special
 schools or schools of skill.

 Alternate Assessment Based on Modified Attainment of Knowledge (content, concepts and
 skills) for learners with disabilities who are working on grade-level content that is covered in the general
 assessment. However, because of their disability they may require more time to master the content. These
 assessments measure a learner’s mastery of grade-level content with reduced load or at a more functional
 level. Target learners can include learners with moderate intellectual disability, learners who are deaf,
 some learners on skills programmes etc.

 Alternate Assessments Based on Grade-level Attainment of Knowledge (content, concepts
 and skills) for learners with disabilities or learning difficulties that need testing formats or procedures
 that provide them with equal opportunities to demonstrate their attainment of content which is at the
 same grade-level as the general assessment. Target learners can include learners who are blind, have
 communication difficulties, physical disabilities, learners who are dyslexic or with hearing loss and who
 need additional time, alternate formats, readers, amanuensis, electronic equipment, etc. as outlined in the
 policy document, National policy on the conduct, administration and management of the National Senior
 Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF).

All three types of assessment should be available in ordinary schools so that learners need not be referred to
special schools. Teachers will incrementally be trained on the various curriculum differentiation methodologies
so as to be able to apply the various adaptive and supportive assessment measures in school-based as well
as formal assessment.

Every learner will therefore have access to the standard of assessment that is suited for his or her needs. No
learner will be disadvantaged by the system in as far as that there will be a lowering of expectations or he/she
is not assessed at all. All learners will also have the opportunity to receive a school leaving certificate.

Learners who experience significant barriers to learning must also have the possibility of straddling grades
which allows them to take certain subjects at grade level and others at a different level.

(Refer to Appendix 4 for more about assessing learners in a class who have different levels of attainment).

6. HOW DO WE RECORD, ANALYSE AND REPORT RESULTS OF
 ASSESSMENT?

To obtain clear and accurate documentation of an observation, learner behaviours and/or performance need
to be recorded in a systematic way at all stages of the learning process. The recorded information by the
teacher(s) and/or learner(s) can be reviewed and analysed after the observation.

CAPS 19
 The next step is analysing and using the recorded assessment information. Once teachers have assessed
their learners and recorded information about behaviours, skills or activities, they analyse this information to
determine its relevance to the programme planning for the learner.

Baseline Assessment: Entry level indicators are important to obtain and analyse. They help us identify
learners’ previous learning and knowledge of the content of the curriculum. Teachers use this assessment with
new learners, with learners who they suspect may be experiencing an emerging barrier to learning, or when
teachers introduce a new topic or theme. This assessment is most important at the beginning of a unit of study
as it guides teachers in planning exactly:

 What information will be initially presented?

 How it will be presented to learners?

 How it will be practised by the learners?

Entry level indicators also help the teacher to determine learners’ entry points at the beginning of a unit or
topic of study. This phase of assessment helps us to modify the content or differentiate learner activities and
products to accommodate the varying ability levels within the classroom.

Performance/formative based assessment: the information derived will tell the teacher about the learners’
progress through the curriculum, that is, about behaviours, skills, or activities the learner has engaged in, and
possible barriers to learning. Questions to reflect on are:

 Does the information recorded show that a learner has acquired the skills intended by the teacher?

 What does the learner already know?

 What does the learner still need to know?

 Does the recorded information provide an understanding about why the learner is engaged in learning or
 not?

 Does the recorded information add to knowledge about the learner’s progress or his/her learning profile?

Record Keeping

There are various strategies that can be used for record keeping. Teachers and learners can share in the
process of keeping track of learner entry levels and progress during the academic year. Three simple forms
include:

Anecdotal records: The notes can be written and/or recorded anytime and used by the teacher and the
learner to review progress. These notes can be written on sheets of paper, in a notebook or on cards.

Portfolios: There are numerous types of portfolios which can be used to assess a learner’s progress based
on a varied collection of the learner’s work. The items in a work portfolio can include work samples, homework
assignments, final products and classroom test results. The collection of the learner’s work is done over time.
Portfolios should include learner self-assessment and reflection as well as teacher written feedback on some
or all of the collected work.

 20 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Journaling: Learners are always able to provide quality information on their own learning and academic
needs. Thus, another form of learner self-assessment is journaling which refers to having learners reflect and
write briefly on their learning usually at the end of the day or after a particular lesson.

 Stop and Think!

 The minimum requirements for achieving grades, as spelt out in the National Curriculum Statement
 (Grades R – 12), may not be compromised. However, within a flexible learner-based and learner-paced
 approach to the curriculum, all learners will be enabled to achieve their full potential irrespective of whether
 or not the end result will be a final certificate.

 Learners who experience significant barriers to learning must also have the possibility of straddling grades
 which allows them to take certain subjects at grade level and others at a different level.

 All recording and reporting instruments must include sections on the nature of support needed by each
 individual learner.

 All support to learners must be coordinated by a site-based support team who will be trained and monitored
 by a district-based support team. Regular feed-back on progress and effectiveness of support must be
 given to:

 The learner

 The institution based support team

 The parents/care givers

 The district-based support team

 Promotion schedules are a summary of what has been achieved in a specific year and grade.

 A grade 4 learner with a disability experiencing barriers to learning, will therefore now for the first time be
 fully assessed on the assessment content and expectations of the subjects for the specific grade.

 In the remarks column the teacher will indicate progress made as well as support needed, e.g. scribe was
 needed for Social Science and Languages: reading was taught on a grade 2 level.

 A learner who does not meet the requirements for promotion can be progressed to the next grade in order
 to prevent the learner from being retained in the same phase for longer than five (Foundation Phase)/four
 years. In such cases a programme of action to address the backlog must be in place and the school should
 provide evidence that support has been provided within the Screening Identification and Assessment and
 Support (SIAS) framework. It is therefore important to gather evidence and information about the learner.
 Information must be captured about adaptive or alternative methods of assessment that are needed
 throughout the year. Evidence must be kept of the support or interventions that were given to the learner.
 Evidence of medical and or psychological reports must be gathered and kept. A record must also be kept
 on how appropriate, effective and available the adaptive methods being used are.

 According to above-mentioned policy, reporting should be undertaken at least once a term and be made

CAPS 21
 available to all stakeholders involved.

 The report card also has to be modified in order to reflect on different levels of teaching and learning
 practices for learners with barriers to learning:

 Do take note that in cases where no curriculum modifications take place but only concessions in terms of
 assessment procedures (e.g. amanuensis), NO ALTERATION TO EXISTING REPORT CARDS should be
 undertaken and CONCESSIONS IMPLEMENTED should NOT be reflected. However, all documentation
 on history and reasons why concessions had been granted, have to be recorded in the LEARNER
 PROFILE.

 In terms of curriculum differentiation where learner accessed the knowledge, concepts and skills on a
 lower level (straddling) the report card has to reflect on the levels on which knowledge has been gained
 and skills mastered.

 An additional section on Life Skills acquired is also advisable and should also be expanded as learner
 progresses through different phases.

7. ACCESSING SUPPORT FOR CURRICULUM DIFFERENTIATION

A key to successful curriculum differentiation is building a collaborative network of support for teachers.
Support is needed at all levels and stages of teaching and learning. By working collaboratively, teachers
learn from one another, support the tasks of one another, develop learning materials together, serve as
a resource to one another and a critical peer. Support can be accessed at various levels of the schooling
system.

Examples

 At school level: School Management Team and Institutional Level Support Teams (ILST)
 At district level: District Based Support Teams, Full Service Schools, Special Schools and
 neighbouring schools
 At community level: Parents/ care givers, other professionals, Universities and Non-
 Governmental Organizations
 Media: Internet websites e.g. teacher education websites, UNESCO, Department
 of Education, Pretoria.

 22 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Glossary of Terms

 The notion refers to difficulties that arise within the education system as a
 whole, the learning site and/or within the learner him/herself which prevent
 both the system and the learner needs from being met. When, based on
 Barriers to learning
 objective evaluation made by an educational authority, it is ascertained
 that teaching and learning are hampered where such needs are not met,
 educationally sound measures must be applied.
 Refers to what we teach - what learners are expected to learn, know,
 Curriculum content
 understand, and do.
 The process of modifying, extending or adapting the curriculum according to
 Curriculum Differentiation:
 the different ability levels of the learners in one class
 Groups of departmental employees whose job it is to promote inclusive
 District Based Support education through training, curriculum delivery, distribution of resources,
 Teams (DBST) identifying and addressing barriers to learning, leadership and general
 management
 Teaching designed to have learners work at different levels in different
 Differentiated teaching
 groups and on different tasks in the classroom.
 Entry Level Indicator A point where a learner should start in learning particular concept or skill.
 Ordinary schools which are specially equipped to address a full range of
 barriers to learning in an inclusive education setting. In addition to their
 Full-Service Schools ordinary learner population they will become accessible to most learners in
 an area who experience barriers to learning and will provide the necessary
 support. policies and practices.
 Teams established by institutions in general, further and higher education,
 as institution-level support mechanism whose primary function is to put in
 Institution Level Support
 place co-ordinated learner and educator support services. The teams have
 Teams (ILSTs)
 different names in different provinces such as Site Based Support Teams,
 Teacher Support Teams, etc.
 A way learners can reflect on their learning by responding to open-ended
 Journaling:
 questions or by writing brief statements.
 A means of assessing a learner’s need based on gender, culture, learning
 Learning Profile
 styles, linguistic preferences, interests and abilities.
 Method of Presentation A variety of techniques for gathering and presenting information to learners
 Activities where the focus is on a key concept but the teacher can use varied
 Multi-level Activities
 approaches, teaching and learning modes, and levels within a lesson.
 A group of learners who learn together in one classroom, despite having
 Multi-level class
 varying levels of abilities and/or literacy backgrounds.
 Designing teaching so that learners may function at multiple levels of ability,
 Multi-level teaching engage in authentic learning, receive support, and learn in heterogeneous
 groups and situations.
 A set of tasks performed by the learners to show that they understand a
 Performance assessments
 concept, skill or behaviour.
 Schools equipped to deliver education to learners requiring high-intensive
 Special schools
 educational and other support either on a full-time or a part-time basis.
 These would be special schools which are transformed to fulfill a wider
 Special school resource function of accommodating learners who have high intensity support needs,
 centres as well as providing a range of support services to ordinary schools, full-
 service schools as part of the District-based Support System.

CAPS 23
 Screening, Identification,
Assessment and Support
(SIAS)
 Learners who experience one or more of a range of barriers to learning may
 not fit comfortably within a particular phase or grade. In such cases straddling
Straddling must be implemented. Straddling is when a learner or group of learners at
 a specific grade or level work towards attaining assessment standards from
 more than one grade within learning areas or learning programmes.
 It is a means of teaching one concept and meeting the different learning
 needs in a group. It can be an assignment, lesson or a strategy. Tasks and/
Tiered instruction
 or resources vary according to learning profile, readiness and interest. It
 maximizes learning for all learners.
 An instructional strategy in which the teacher varies the levels of questions
Varying questions asked based on a learner’s background of experience, interests, and
 learning profile

 24 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 References

Antioch School District, Department of Curriculum and Instruction (2007). Differentiation information. Accessed
August 7, 2011, from http://staff.antioch34.com/BAnderson/diffinfo.htm

Department of Education (2011). An addendum to the policy document, The National Senior

Certificate: A Qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF),

Regarding the National Protocol for Recording and Reporting (Grades R – 12). Pretoria:

Department of Education

Department of Basic Education (2010) Guidelines for full-service/inclusive schools. pretoria. Department of
Basic Education

Department of Education (2008) Guidelines to ensure quality education and support in special schools and
special school resource centres. Pretoria: Department of Education

Department of Education (2008) National strategy on screening, identification, assessment and. Pretoria:
Department of Education

Department of Education (2002). Inclusion guidelines for assessment. Pretoria: Department of Education.

Department of Education. (2006). Regarding the National Protocol for Recording and Reporting (Grades R –
12). Pretoria: Department of Education.

Department of Education. (2007). Implementing White Paper 6 inclusive learning programmes: Participant’s
manual. Pretoria: Department of Education.

Department of Basic Education (2011). An addendum to the policy document, The National Senior Certificate:
A Qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF). Pretoria: Department of Basic
Education.

Department of Basic Education (2011). National Protocol for Assessment: Grades R – 12. Pretoria: Department
of Basic Education.

Department of Education, Alberta (2007). Differentiated assessment. Retrieved on August 1, 2011 from

http://education.alberta.ca/media/1233985/7_ch4%20differentiated.pdf

Longmanusahome.com (no date). Teaching in the multilevel classroom. Accessed August 1, 2011, from

http://longmanusahome.com/centerstage/images/stories/monographs/multilevel_monograph.pdf

Noble, T. (2004). Integrating the revised Bloom’s taxonomy with multiple intelligences: a planning tool for
curriculum differentiation. Teachers’ College Record, 106 (1). 193-211.

CAPS 25
 Pritchard, A. (2009). Ways of learning: Learning theories and learning styles in the classroom. London:
Routledge.

Red Clay Consolidated School District (2007). Using fractions to represent parts of a whole-tiered activities.
Retrieved August 5, 2011 from

http://instructionaltechnologyconnections4u.pbworks.com/f/Sample+Tiered+Activities+Lesson+-+Math+-
+3rd+grade.pdf

Tomlinson, C. (2001). How to differentiate instruction in mixed-ability classrooms? Alexandria, VA: Association
for Supervision and Curriculum Development.

UNESCO (2004). Changing teaching practices: using curriculum differentiation to respond to learners’ diversity.
Paris: UNESCO.

 26 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Useful Websites for Curriculum Differentiation Resources

Antioch School District, Department of Curriculum and Instruction:
http://staff.antioch34.com/BAnderson/diffinfo.htm

Help4teachers:
http://www.help4teachers.com/samples.htm

Inclusive Education in Action:
http://www.inclusive-education-in-action.org/iea/index.php?menuid=55&reporeid=137 (resources on inclusive
curricula).

Learnerslink.com:
http://www.learnerslink.com/

Longmanusahome.com:
http://longmanusahome.com/centerstage/images/stories/monographs/multilevel_monograph.pdf

Red Clay Consolidated School District:
http://instructionaltechnologyconnections4u.pbworks.com/f/Sample+Tiered+Activities+Lesson+-+Math+-
+3rd+grade.pdf

Thutong - South African Education Portal:
http://www.thutong.doe.gov.za/

Tiered curriculum project:
http://www.doe.state.in.us/exceptional/gt/tiered_curriculum/welcome.html

UNESCO: International Bureau of Education:
http://www.ibe.unesco.org/en/themes/curricular-themes/inclusive-education/tools.html

CAPS 27
 Appendicies

Appendix 1: Sample Lesson Plans

Sample Lesson Plan 1

Subject: Mathematics

Grade: 3

Topic: Fractions

Objectives: Learners will:

 be able to illustrate how fractions represent part of a whole

 identify the whole in part-whole fractions

Essential Questions: How can the fractional parts of a set be modelled?

Warm-up Activity: Teacher displays a set of interlocking cubes for all learners to see.

There should be several cubes of several different colours. Learners are asked to respond to the following
questions:

1. What fraction of the cubes is red?

2. What fraction of the cubes is green?

3. What fraction of the cubes is yellow?

Teacher has learners respond on paper, and share responses.

Instructional Strategies:

 differentiation

 grouping/regrouping

Background to lesson:

Fractions (halves/thirds) have been introduced and illustrated by the learners with pictures, etc. Learners need
to be put in ability groups based on their classroom performance. (Teacher to consider learners who are below
the standards, (Consider learners who are below the standards, learners meeting the standards, and learners
who exceed the standards)

Resources: paper squares, paper circles, paper rectangles, paper triangles.

Lesson development:

 28 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Tier 1 (Below-level learners): Using paper circles (pizza) and squares (sandwich), learners in pairs determine
how to share the food equally and illustrate by folding the paper. Have two pairs determine how they can share
equally with four people. They can cut the parts and stack them to see if they match. Have the four learners
repeat the process for sharing a pancake equally with three peers (let the circle represent the crumpet). Each
learner must explain in pictures or words how they shared equally.

Tier 2 (Learners who meet the standards): Using paper circles (pizza) and squares (sandwich), have
learners in groups of three determine how to share the food equally and illustrate by folding the paper. Have
2 groups of three determine how they can share equally with six people. Have the group of six repeat the
process for sharing a birthday cake with 12 people. In each case, they can cut the parts and stack to match.
Have the group start with half a cake and divide equally for 3, 6 and 12 people. Each learner must explain in
pictures or words how they shared equally.

Tier 3 (Learners who exceed the standards): Using paper rectangles (sandwiches) and triangles (slices of
pie), have learners in pairs determine how to share the food in three different ways to get two equal parts. Have
them illustrate by folding the paper.

Teacher gets learners to reflect on:

Are there other different ways to divide each shape equally?

How many ways are there?

Have the pair determine which shapes (circles, squares, rectangles, triangles) are easier to divide evenly and
illustrate why with a particular food of their choice. Each learner must explain in pictures or words how they
shared equally.

Assessment of learning

As the learners work, the teacher will circulate among the groups and note the children’s abilities to divide
materials into equal parts and to reorganize and check for equal parts.

She will consider the following:

1. Can learners explain orally how many equal parts there are and demonstrate how they know the parts are
 equal?
2. Can learners explain in writing or pictures how they know that the parts are equal?

Conclusion

In whole a class discussion, teacher/learners will reflect on the learning that takes place by sharing strategies
of how they divided the food. They will also share their pictorial or written explanations.

Teaching Tips

Learners should have 1 of each shape for their group work. That is Tier1 should have one paper circle, and
one square, etc

(Adapted from Red Clay Consolidated School District, 2007)

CAPS 29
 Sample Lesson Plan 2

Grade: 3

Subject: Language

Topic: Reading for Meaning

Objective: Learners will:

use graphic organizers to read more carefully by organizing information to retell or restate the text.

Essential Questions:

How can graphic organizers help you to organize information to retell a story?

Warm-up Activity:

1. Ask learners to brainstorm events as they remember from Three Little Pigs (no need to read the story,
 just work from their memory.) Record all events on the board regardless of the order or repetition of
 events.

2. Ask learners if they notice any problems with the order of the events once all events have been
 recorded. More than likely the events are out of order and repeat.

3. Ask learners for ideas on how to organize the list. Ask learners if they could re-list the events would
 they choose a different way of organizing the events? How might they choose to do it? What would it
 look like? How would using an organizer help them to order events and prevent repeats? Brainstorm
 what the organizer might look like.

4. Give learners a blank piece of paper and ask them to draw an organizer for the three little pigs.

5. Have learners share their organizers.

6. Explain that today’s activities will focus on organizing important information from text they have read.

Instructional Strategies

• Differentiation - by process and/or content

• Flexible grouping - create groups using learner profiles

Lesson Development

Learners must have a basic understanding of graphic organizers, sequencing, story elements and
summarization. This experience should be a part of the lesson that precedes these activities. Learners should
also be familiar with the story, The Three Little Pigs for the purpose of the Warm-Up.

Resources

 Blank white paper

 A reading selection appropriate for learner readiness levels

 30 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Lesson Development

1. Using the above criteria, group your learners according to ability level. Learners are not physically
 grouped, but should be completing activities according to ability level.

2. Learners Below the Standard, Learners Meeting the Standard, Learner Exceeding the Standard are
 the names for the differentiated activities.

Learners Below the Standard

1. Explain to learners that they will use a pre-designed graphic organizer to gather information about the
 text while they read. The graphic organizer will include story elements and one main event from the
 beginning, middle and end of the story.

2. Learners will then work from their graphic organizers and write a retelling of the story. The retelling
 should include all parts of the graphic organizer.

Learners Meeting the Standard

1. Explain to learners that they will use a pre-designed graphic organizer to gather information about the
 text while they read. The graphic organizer will include story elements and all main events of the story.

2. Learners will then work from their graphic organizers and write a retelling of the story. The retelling
 should include all parts of the graphic organizer.

Learners Exceeding the Standard

1. Explain to learners that they will be designing an organizer that they will use to collect information
 about the text while they read. The graphic organizer should include story elements and all the main
 events of the story.

2. Learners can use paper and pencil to create their graphic organizers.

3. Learners will then work from their graphic organizers and write a retelling of the story. The retelling
 should include all parts of the graphic organizer.

Assessment of Learning

Learners will be assessed on the completeness and accuracy of their graphic organizers and retelling at their
respective levels.

Conclusion of lesson

Learners share their graphic organizers and then read their retellings to demonstrate the transfer at the
conclusion of the lesson.

Teaching Tips

 If your learners are not familiar with the story, The Three Little Pigs, for the Warm-Up, you can choose a
 different story that is familiar to the class. If needed read the story to the class.

CAPS 31
  It is suggested that learners sit in heterogeneous groups which will allow for peer mentoring when learners
 have questions. The tiered activities are leveled by ability level. However, the levels should be renamed
 when explained to learners.

 When giving directions to the groups, explain that all learners will write a retelling at the end of the lesson,
 but different learners will be taking different paths to get there.

(Adapted from Red Clay Consolidated School District, 2007)

Sample Lesson Plan 3

Grade: 3

Topic: Learning Map Skills

 1. Learners will be able to explain the purpose of a map.
 2. Learners will be able to read a map key to interpret a map.
 Objectives:
 3. Learners will be able to draw their own map.
 4. Learners will be able to use cardinal and intermediate direction on a map or globe.
 Whole Class Activities Assessment

 1. Class will brainstorm all the ways that a map is used 1. All learners involved in brainstorming
 in their world. The teacher will list on a board or on
 chart paper. Involved in discussion

 List should have 15 or more
 examples.
 2. Teacher will show learners various types of maps.
 Learners will identify the different elements on a map 2. Required items identified correctly
 such as scale, key, compass rose, equator, cities,
 states, landforms, etc. All items are included
 Level 1 Activities Assessment
 1. Learners will follow directional cues (N, E, S, W) 1. Distance calculated correctly
 given by the teacher to end in a specific location Correct directions were followed
 on a map. i.e. a learner would take 2 steps north,
 3 steps east, and 1 step north and end up where? 2. Everyone in the group participated
 2. Learners will work in pairs to create a map of All required fields were included
 their classroom. By creating a map key, learners Map is neatly drawn
 will identify at least 5 objects in the room. Key uses three or more symbols

 Level 2 Activities Assessment

 1. Learners will follow directional cues (N, E, S, W, 1. Distance calculated correctly
 NW, SE, etc) given by the teacher to end in a
 specific location on a map. i.e. a learner would Correct directions were followed
 take 2 steps north, 3 steps east, and 1 step north
 and end up where?

 2. Learners will work in pairs to create a map of 2. Everyone in the group participated
 their school. By creating a map key, learners will
 identify at least 8 objects in the school. All required fields were included

 Map is neatly drawn

 Key uses five or more symbols

 32 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Level 3 Activities Assessment

 1. Learners will follow directional cues (N, E, S, W, 1. Distance calculated correctly
 NW, SE, etc) given by the teacher and follow the
 scale provided to end in a specific location on a Correct directions were followed
 map. i.e. learner would go 1 mile northwest, 3
 miles west, and 5 miles south and end up where?

 2. Learners will work in pairs to create a detailed 2. Everyone in the group participated
 map of a town. By creating a map key and using
 compass rose, learners will identify at least 10 All required fields were included
 objects in the town.
 Map is neatly drawn

 Key uses eight or more symbols

 Scale and compass rose are accurate
 Whole Class Culminating Activities Assessment

 1. Learners will return to whole group and share and 1. Group cooperation and sharing
 explain the maps that they created.
 Oral explanation is clear
 2. Learners as a class will invent and name an
 imaginary state and everyone will contribute their 2. Maps are drawn neatly
 previously made map of a classroom, school, or
 town as a part of the new state. Shows creative and original thinking

(Adapted from Antioch School District, Department of Curriculum and Instruction, 2007).

CAPS 33
 Sample Lesson Plan 4
Grade: 3

Topic: Flow Charts

 1. Introduce visual aid of flow chart.
 Objectives: 2. Accurately complete flow chart using words and/or pictures
 3. Explain steps of specific life cycle introduced by the teacher (ex. plants, frogs).
 Whole Class Activities Assessment

 Have learners explain how graphic organizers help * All learners actively listen and participate in
 us to understand what is being taught. discussions.
 Introduce the flow chart as a new chart of a graphic
 organizer.
 Demonstrate the flow chart on the board/overhead
 showing the seasons.
 Explain that we are now using flow charts to help us
 understand the life cycle of a plant.
 Level 1 Activities Assessment

  Each child will complete flow chart with the correct * Correctly match pictures in correct order in flow
 chart.
 pictures and in proper order
  Each child will identify the number of steps and * Flow chart will be completed neatly and
 accurately.
 describe what the mature plant will be.
  Choose one vegetable from flow chart. Using a * Sentences will include correct spelling,
 punctuation, and grammar.
 complete sentence, the learner will explain each
 step in the life cycle of the plant chosen.
 Level 2 Activities Assessment

  Each child will complete flow chart with correct * Correctly label flow chart with correct wording
 and pictures.
 pictures and words in proper order.
  Each child will identify the proper steps to describe * Paragraph is in correct form, which includes
 correct spelling, punctuation, and grammar.
 what the mature plant will be, and label each step
 with correct vocabulary term from the word bank.
  Choose one vegetable and describe the life cycle
 using paragraph form.
 Level 3 Activities Assessment

  Using a flow chart template each child will complete * Complete flow chart using correct terminology
 and illustrations.
 flow chart using written descriptions (include
 illustrations). * Thoroughly explain steps including correct
 spelling, punctuation, and grammar.
  Learners will describe in detail each of the steps in
 the flow chart.
 Whole Class Culminating Activities Assessment

  Using paper learners will create the life cycle of a Final product will be an accurate replication of the
 flow chart that was created in the classroom.
 chosen vegetable/fruit.

 34 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 (Adapted from Antioch School District, Department of Curriculum and Instruction, 2007).

Sample Lesson 5
Grade: R

Topic: Animals and animal traits.

 1. Identify animal traits
 Objectives:
 2. Learners will compare and contrast the animal traits
 Whole Class Activities Assessment

  Obtain recordings of animals in a story book used in class All listening and participation

  Brainstorm the traits of the animals.

  Create attribute chart of the animals.

  Record the animal traits on the chart.
 Level 1 Activities Assessment

  Create a flip book of the animals. Picture of animal will be on the
 correct page of the book.
 Flip book: Record one attribute per page. Have learners cut
 out picture to correspond with each trait.
 Level 2 Activities Assessment

  Invent imaginary animal using all the traits. Using teacher Learners will be able to create an
 imaginary animal that contains all the
 specified art media, learners will create the imaginary animal. traits discussed.
 Level 3 Activities Assessment

  After creating an imaginary animal, learners will write a story Story will include all of the details
 listed.
 about this animal. Story will include how animal eats, how it
 would move, where it will live and how it will grow.
 Whole Class Culminating Activities Assessment

  Learners will share their creations with the class. Learners will be able to explain what
 they have created.

(Adapted from Antioch School District, Department of Curriculum and Instruction, 2007).

CAPS 35
 Appendix 2: Groupings of learners

Type of
 Possible uses Points to consider
Grouping
Whole class – Promotes belonging, reduces isolation Physical inclusion does
large group not guarantee instructional
 o Discussions and sharing information and experiences inclusion!

 o Introducing new topics, themes, units

 o Developing new concepts, skills and understandings

 o Developing and refining classroom expectations, rules and
 procedures
Small group Can be facilitated by the teacher, a learner or the group itself Same ability/skill groups
instruction should not become
 o Same ability/skill group can help the teacher to focus on permanent and they should
 developing a particular skill; learners with specific disability not be composed of same
 could also work around certain skills in a ‘same disability’ learners all the time in
 group (e.g. Braille, sign language, mobility, life skills order to avoid labelling
 instruction) and isolation. They should
 only be used to learn a
 o Mixed ability/skill group useful for project work, learning a particular skill.
 new skill or practicing one recently learned, discussing an
 assignment, problem solving – different objectives and sub-
 tasks can be assigned to different learners; it promotes co-
 operation, peer-support and valuing individual contributions
Paired groups Two learners work together: offers opportunities to enhance This way of working needs
 social and communication skills and friendships; can provide some practice so that
 direct instruction and build self-esteem ‘tutors’ will not just pass on
 ‘correct answers’. Pairing
 o Can be formed on the basis of same/mixed skill/ability, interest, needs to be grounded on
 etc. Could also pair a disabled and non-disabled learner learning for both, and the
 tutor should not always be
 o Can be same Grade mates or cross-Grade mates non-disabled learner.

 o One learner is assigned as a ‘tutor’ based on the skill, ability or
 experience.
Interest group Paired or small group where learners share the same interest. o Usually highly
 motivational
 o Interest can be a topic, a learning area, a specific skill.
 o Findings should be
 o Encourage learners to learn more about their specific interest shared with other
 – at their own level learners to increase
 learning of all learners
Co-operative All groups are given the same topic but each learner in the o It is important to ensure
expert groups group is given one part of the topic to learn (according to his that each member gets
(jigsaw) level, interest, etc.) to his/ her work done
 – support might be
 o It is the responsibility of each member to learn his/ her part, needed here
 thus becoming ‘expert’
 o Allows for individual
 o After studying individual parts, the group comes together and and group activity
 each learner presents his part to complement to the whole.
 o Feedback – sharing in
 o Another possibility: A topic and its sub-topics are identified. In the groups is essential.
 each group, each member is assigned with a sub-topic. New This might require
 groups get together according to sub-topics. These groups are support.
 now ‘experts’. In the expert groups learners study about the
 sub-topic. Then they get back to their original group and share
 what they have learned in the ‘expert’ group.

 36 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Type of
 Possible uses Points to consider
 Grouping
 Cluster groups o Cluster groups are grouping of all learners within a class for o Cluster group should
 small instructional groups, based on one or more learner not be used for
 characteristics. anything else than
 for an instructional
 o Usually learners stay in the cluster group for a longer period purpose.
 for a specific instructional reason (e.g. accelerated maths,
 community project, second/ third language tuition) o Grouping should not
 encourage negative
 labelling.

 o Learners can belong
 to several clusters in
 different learning areas

Appendix 3: Practical activities to assess learners’ multiple intelligences

 Intelligence Recognize by Learning Style
 Strong at math & problem-solving skills The highly logical mathematical
 learners will be interested in
 Ability to discern logical or numerical patterns problem solving and hypothesis
 –testing strategies.
 Logical- Ability to pursue extended lines of logic and
 Mathematical reasoning

 Asks ‘why’ & ‘how’ questions, wants to reason
 things out, wants to know ‘what’s coming up next’ -
 sequential thinking
 Strong visual imagination and other spatial abilities Learners who are visually-
 spatially strong learn best from
 Likes to design, draw, read graphics, posters information that they see or
 read. They have strong visual
 Needs pictures to understand, likes puzzles, mazes, imaginations and are inclined to
 organizing space, objects and areas be involved in spatial activities.

 Has ability to mentally manipulate forms, objects or
 Spatial
 people in space or transfer them to other locations or
 into other elements

 It’s the capacity to recognize forms, shapes and how
 they relate and interact with another

 It is also sensitivity to the balance and composition
 of shapes

CAPS 37
 Intelligence Recognize by Learning Style
 Strong people skills Highly interpersonal learners
 enjoy engaging in learning
 Ability to make distinctions among others in their experiences in a social setting.
 moods, feelings, biases, thoughts and values

 It’s the ability to act appropriately using knowledge of
 others
Interpersonal
 Loves to talk & influence, usually a group leader, an
 organizer

 Communicates well

 Good at conflict resolution, listening, negotiating &
 persuasion
 Ability to handle objects skilfully, either fine or gross Learners who are
 motor movements
 highly bodily-kinaesthetic enjoy
 Also the ability to control your own movements for learning whilst moving about
 function or expression freely and touching. They
 Bodily- also learn best from handling
Kinaesthetic Desire to move! materials, writing and drawing

 Constant movement or commitment to comfort

 Wants to get up, move around, tap, touch, fiddle with
 things & do things
 Use of core operations of language Learners with strong oral /
 SASOL language abilities like to
 Sensitivity to the meaning, sound, inflection and read and think out loud/ sign
 order of words

 Loves language - reads and loves to talk
 Verbal-
 linguistic Constant talking, a good memory for dates & names

 Likes to tell and listen to stories

 Likes a variety of voices and remember jokes

 Enjoys reading
 Has a good understanding of own strengths and Learners who are highly
 weaknesses emotionally sensitive enjoy
 solitude, like thinking and are
 Able to exercise self-control happy to work alone.

 Good at goal-setting & is comfortable being alone
Intrapersonal
 Make choices in favour of long term benefit
(Emotional)
 The ability to develop successful working models of
 oneself

 A way to learn and develop new behaviours based
 on self-knowledge

 38 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 Appendix 4: Assessing learners in a class who have different levels of attainment

 7
 1 2 3 4 5 6
 Subject:
 O/A
 Grade N/A E/A MO/A A/A S/A ME/A
 Name of educator: 80-
 0-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70-79
 100
 Teach core All learners
 content: have been
All groups:

 working on
 _________ but
 on differential
 levels
 Enrich Knowledge, On
 knowledge, concepts grade
 concepts and and skills level
Enrichment

 skills that allow attained on
 for access an advanced /
group:

 to enriched enriched level.
 learning.
 Knowledge, Knowledge, On
 concepts and concepts and grade
Unmodified

 skills that allow skills attained level
group:

 access to grade on grade level.
 level learning

 Scaffold Knowledge, On
 knowledge, concepts and part of
 concepts and skills attained grade
Unwinding

 skills that on a scaffold / level
 allow access grouped more
group:

 to scaffold attainable level.
 learning.
 Straddle Knowledge, Grade
 Knowledge, concepts and (lower)
Straddle group:

 concepts and skills have
 skills to allow been attained
 access to on a lower
 learning on a grade / phase
 lower grade or level)
 phase.

Note:

 In the top row the teacher indicates the subject, grade and performance indicators.

 The second row reflects the broad theme and/or the appropriate knowledge, concepts and skills that all
 learners in the classroom have been working on. This is sometimes also called the core knowledge,
 concepts and skills of a specific grade within a specific phase.

 The next four rows indicate the differential levels of attainment: Enrichment, Unmodified, scaffold, and
 straddling. These four rows also indicate the levels of achievement together with the grade level and
 descriptors.

 Every learner will therefore have access to the standard of assessment that is suited for his or her needs.

CAPS 39
 No learner will be disadvantaged by the system in as far as that there will be a lowering of expectations or
 he/she is not assessed at all.

 What is very important is that the grade column is used to indicate the specific grade levels on which a
 learner displays achievement of the relevant knowledge, concepts and skills.

 This is then also very important to understand that teachers need not only have a sound knowledge of the
 curriculum of a specific grade in which they teach, but also have a sound knowledge of where to meet the
 learner on lower grade levels.

 40 GUIDELINES FOR responding to LEARNER diversity IN THE CLASSROOM
 GUIDELINES FOR RESPONDING TO LEARNER

 National Curriculum Statement (NCS)
DIVERSITY IN THE CLASSROOM | English

 Curriculum Assessment
 Policy Statement

 Grades R - 12