National Curriculum Statement (NCS)

 Curriculum and Assessment
NATURAL SCIENCES

 Policy Statement

 Senior Phase
 Grades 7-9

 
 
 
 
 Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement
 GRADES 7-9

 NATURAL SCIENCES

CAPS
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
DISCLAIMER

In view of the stringent time requirements encountered by the Department of Basic Education to effect the necessary editorial changes and layout
to the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements and the supplementary policy documents, possible errors may occur in the said documents
placed on the official departmental websites.

There may also be vernacular inconsistencies in the language documents at Home-, First and Second Additional Language levels which have been
translated in the various African Languages. Please note that the content of the documents translated and versioned in the African Languages are
correct as they are based on the English generic language documents at all three language levels to be implemented in all four school phases.

If any editorial, layout or vernacular inconsistencies are detected, the user is kindly requested to bring this to the attention of the Department of
Basic Education.

E-mail: capslangcomments@dbe.gov.za or fax (012) 328 9828

Department of Basic Education
222 Struben Street
Private Bag X895
Pretoria 0001
South Africa
Tel: +27 12 357 3000
Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street Private Bag X9023
Cape Town 8000
South Africa
Tel: +27 21 465 1701
Fax: +27 21 461 8110
Website: http://www.education.gov.za

© 2011 Department of Basic Education

Isbn: 978-1-4315-0528-9

Design and Layout by: Ndabase Printing Solution

Printed by: Government Printing Works

 2 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
FOREWORD by the minister

 Our national curriculum is the culmination of our efforts over a period of seventeen
 years to transform the curriculum bequeathed to us by apartheid. From the start of
 democracy we have built our curriculum on the values that inspired our Constitution
 (Act 108 of 1996). The Preamble to the Constitution states that the aims of the
 Constitution are to:

 • heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic
 values, social justice and fundamental human rights;

 • improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person;

 • lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is
 based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by law;
 and

• build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of
 nations.

Education and the curriculum have an important role to play in realising these aims.

In 1997 we introduced outcomes-based education to overcome the curricular divisions of the past, but the experience
of implementation prompted a review in 2000. This led to the first curriculum revision: the Revised National Curriculum
Statement Grades R-9 and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (2002).

Ongoing implementation challenges resulted in another review in 2009 and we revised the Revised National
Curriculum Statement (2002) and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 to produce this document.

From 2012 the two National Curriculum Statements, for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12 respectively, are combined
in a single document and will simply be known as the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. The National
Curriculum Statement for Grades R-12 builds on the previous curriculum but also updates it and aims to provide
clearer specification of what is to be taught and learnt on a term-by-term basis.

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 represents a policy statement for learning and teaching in South
African schools and comprises of the following:

(a) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS) for all approved subjects listed in this document;

(b) National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement
 Grades R-12; and

(c) National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12.

MRS ANGIE MOTSHEKGA, MP
MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION

CAPS
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
CONTENTS
Section 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement..... 3
1.1 Background...................................................................................................................................................... 3

1.2 Overview........................................................................................................................................................... 3

1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum............................................................................................. 4

1.4 Time Allocation. ............................................................................................................................................... 6

 1.4.1 Foundation Phase.................................................................................................................................... 6

 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase.................................................................................................................................. 6

 1.4.3 Senior Phase........................................................................................................................................... 7

 1.4.4 Grades 10-12........................................................................................................................................... 7

SECTION 2: INTRODUCTION TO NATURAL SCIENCES ....................................................................... 8

2.1 Introduction...................................................................................................................................................... 8

2.2 Indigenous knowledge systems and Natural Sciences. .............................................................................. 8

2.3 Teaching Natural Sciences. ............................................................................................................................ 8

2.4 Organisation of the Natural Sciences Curriculum ....................................................................................... 9

2.5 Allocation of teaching time............................................................................................................................. 9

2.6 Specific aims.................................................................................................................................................. 10

2.7 Process Skills ................................................................................................................................................ 10

2.8 Resources....................................................................................................................................................... 12

2.9 Detailed summary of Natural Sciences concepts and content, and time allocations............................. 13

SECTION 3: SENIOR PHASE NATURAL SCIENCES CONTENT AND CONCEPTS. ........................... 17

SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT. ................................................................................................................... 85

4.1 INTRODUCTION. ............................................................................................................................................ 85

4.2 INFORMAL ASSESSMENT OR DAILY ASSESSMENT................................................................................. 85

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT................................................................................................................................ 86

4.4 FORMAL ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR NATURAL SCIENCES ................................................... 87

4.5 RECORDING AND REPORTING.................................................................................................................... 89

4.6 MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT................................................................................................................. 93

4.7 GENERAL. ...................................................................................................................................................... 93

CAPS 1
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 2 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
Section 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE Curriculum and
Assessment Policy Statement

1.1 Background

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the
schooling sector.

To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming into
effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was developed for
each subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines
in Grades R-12.

1.2 Overview

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for learning
 and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12 (January 2012).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) replaces the two current national curricula
 statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of 31 May 2002,
 and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6 October 2003 and
 No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii) comprise the following policy
 documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January
 2012) during the period 2012-2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment
 Guidelines for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the General
 Education and Training Band, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in Government Gazette No.
 29626 of 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette No.27819 of 20 July 2005;

CAPS 3
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special
 needs, published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy
 document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol
 for Assessment (Grades R-12), promulgated in Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette
 No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.

(d) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy as
 contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South African Schools Act,
 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,)form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to determine minimum outcomes
 and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the assessment of learner achievement to be
 applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values worth
 learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply knowledge
 and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes knowledge in
 local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 serves the purposes of:

 • equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability or
 intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment, and meaningful
 participation in society as citizens of a free country;

 • providing access to higher education;

 • facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and

 • providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is based on the following principles:

 • Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that equal
 educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;

 • Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than rote and
 uncritical learning of given truths;

 • High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at each
 grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;

 4 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 • Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

 • Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices of social and
 environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is sensitive to issues of diversity such as poverty, inequality,
 race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;

 • Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country as
 important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

 • Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and depth to
 those of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

 • identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;

 • work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

 • organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;

 • collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

 • communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;

 • use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the environment and
 the health of others; and

 • demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem solving
 contexts do not exist in isolation.

(e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This can
 only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to learning,
 and how to plan for diversity.

 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant support
 structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based Support Teams, Institutional-Level
 Support Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers in the classroom,
 teachers should use various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those included in the Department of
 Basic Education’s Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

CAPS 5
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
1.4 Time Allocation

1.4.1 Foundation Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 GRADE R GRADES 1-2 GRADE 3
 SUBJECT
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)
 Home Language 10 8/7 8/7
 First Additional Language 2/3 3/4
 Mathematics 7 7 7
 Life Skills 6 6 7
 • Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)
 • Creative Arts
 (2) (2) (2)
 • Physical Education
 (2) (2) (2)
 • Personal and Social Well-being
 (1) (1) (1)
 TOTAL 23 23 25

(b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8 hours and a
 minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and a maximum of 3 hours for
 Additional Language in Grades 1-2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated
 for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

(d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R – 2 and 2 hours as indicated by the hours
 in brackets for Grade 3.

1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Mathematics 6
 Natural Sciences and Technology 3, 5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4
 • Creative Arts (1, 5)
 • Physical Education
 (1)
 • Personal and Social Well-being
 (1, 5)
 TOTAL 27, 5

 6 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
1.4.3 Senior Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 5
 First Additional Language 4
 Mathematics 4, 5
 Natural Sciences 3
 Social Sciences 3
 Technology 2
 Economic Management Sciences 2
 Life Orientation 2
 Creative Arts 2
 TOTAL 27, 5

1.4.4 Grades 10-12

(a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:

 Subject Time allocation per week (hours)
 Home Language 4.5
 First Additional Language 4.5
 Mathematics 4.5
 Life Orientation 2
 A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group B 12 (3x4h)
 Annexure B, Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National policy
 pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of
 the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, subject to the
 provisos stipulated in paragraph 28 of the said policy document.
 TOTAL 27, 5

The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified above, and
may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish to offer
additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

CAPS 7
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
SECTION 2: INTRODUCTION TO NATURAL SCIENCES

2.1 Introduction

Science as we know it today has roots in African, Arabic, Asian, European and American cultures. It has been shaped
by the search to understand the natural world through observation, testing and proving of ideas, and has evolved to
become part of the cultural heritage of all nations. In all cultures and in all times people have wanted to understand
how the physical world works and have needed explanations that satisfy them.

What is Science?

Science is a systematic way of looking for explanations and connecting the ideas we have. In Science certain methods
of inquiry and investigation are generally used. These methods lend themselves to replication and a systematic
approach to scientific inquiry that attempts at objectivity. The methods include formulating hypotheses, and designing
and carrying out experiments to test the hypotheses. Repeated investigations are undertaken, and the methods and
results are carefully examined and debated before they are accepted as valid.

The science knowledge we teach at school is not in doubt – most of it has been tested and known since the 1800s –
but a good teacher will tell the learners something of the arguments and confusion among the people who were the
first to investigate this knowledge.

Science also explores the frontiers of the unknown. There are many unanswered questions such as: Why is climate
changing around the world? What is making the universe expand? What causes the earth’s magnetic field to change?
As with all knowledge, scientific knowledge changes over time as scientists acquire new information and people
change their ways of viewing the world.

2.2 Indigenous knowledge systems and Natural Sciences

Our forebears would not have survived if they had not been able to learn about the natural world they depended on.
They made careful observations, recognised regular patterns in seasons, the life cycles of plants, and the behaviour
of animals.

They had theories about cause and effect too, and understood many of the relationships in the environment where
they lived. These sets of knowledge, each woven into the history and place of people, are known as indigenous
knowledge systems.

Indigenous knowledge includes knowledge about agriculture and food production, pastoral practices and animal
production, forestry, plant classification, medicinal plants, management of biodiversity, food preservation, management
of soil and water, iron smelting, brewing, making dwellings and understanding astronomy. As society changes, some
of that knowledge is being lost. People such as biologists, pharmacists and archaeologists are seeking it out and
writing it down before it is gone.

2.3 Teaching Natural Sciences

Careful selection of content, and use of a variety of approaches to teaching and learning Science, should promote
understanding of:

• Science as a discipline that sustains enjoyment and curiosity about the world and natural phenomena

 8 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
• the history of Science and the relationship between Natural Sciences and other subjects

• the different cultural contexts in which indigenous knowledge systems have developed

• the contribution of Science to social justice and societal development

• the need for using scientific knowledge responsibly in the interest of ourselves, of society and the environment

• the practical and ethical consequences of decisions based on Science.

Natural Sciences at the Senior Phase level lays the basis of further studies in more specific Science disciplines,
such as Life Sciences, Physical Sciences, Earth Sciences or Agricultural Sciences. It prepares learners for active
participation in a democratic society that values human rights and promotes responsibility towards the environment.
Natural Sciences can also prepare learners for economic activity and self-expression.

2.4 Organisation of the Natural Sciences Curriculum

In this curriculum, the knowledge strands below are used as a tool for organising the content of the subject Natural
Sciences.

 Natural Sciences Knowledge Strands
 Life and Living

 Matter and Materials

 Energy and Change

 Planet Earth and Beyond

Each Knowledge Strand is developed progressively across the three years of the Senior Phase. The Knowledge
Strands are a tool for organising the subject content. When teaching Natural Sciences, it is important to emphasise
the links learners need to make with related topics to help them achieve a thorough understanding of the nature of
and the connectedness in Natural Sciences. Links must also be made progressively, across grades to all Knowledge
Strands.

2.5 Allocation of teaching time

Time for Natural Sciences has been allocated in the following way:

• 10 weeks per term, with 3 hours per week

• Grades 7, 8 and 9 have been designed to be completed within 34 weeks

• 6 hours have been included for assessment in terms 1 and 3

• Terms 2 and 4 work will cover 8 weeks each, plus 2 weeks for revision and examinations

The time allocated per topic is a guideline and should be applied flexibly according to circumstances in the classroom
and to accommodate the interests of the learners.

CAPS 9
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
The time allocations given to the different topics provide an indication of the weighting of each topic.

In all Grades, a significant amount of time should be spent on doing practical tasks and investigations which are an
integral part of the teaching and learning process. See detailed time allocation in Section 2.9

2.6 Specific aims

This curriculum aims to provide learners with opportunities to make sense of ideas they have about nature. It also
encourages learners to ask questions that could lead to further research and investigation.

There are three specific aims in Natural Sciences

Specific Aim 1: ‘Doing Science’

Learners should be able to complete investigations, analyse problems and use practical processes and
skills in evaluating solutions.

Learners plan and do simple investigations and solve problems that need some practical ability. Attitudes and
values underpin this ability. Respect for living things is an example – learners should not damage plants; if they
examine small animals they should care for them and release them in the place where they found them.

Specific Aim 2: ‘Knowing the subject content and making connections’

Learners should have a grasp of scientific, technological and environmental knowledge and be able to apply
it in new contexts.

The main task of teaching is to build a framework of knowledge for learners and to help them make connections
between the ideas and concepts in their minds – this is different to learners just knowing facts. When learners do
an activity, questions and discussion must follow and relate to previously acquired knowledge and experience, and
connections must be made.

Specific Aim 3: ‘Understanding the uses of Science ’

Learners should understand the uses of Natural Sciences and indigenous knowledge in society and the
environment.

Science learnt at school should produce learners who understand that school science can be relevant to everyday
life. Issues such as improving water quality, growing food without damaging the land and building energy-efficient
houses are examples of applications.

An appreciation of the history of scientific discoveries, and their relationship to indigenous knowledge and different
world views, enriches our understanding of the connections between Science and Society.

2.7 Process Skills

The teaching and learning of Natural Sciences involves the development of a range of process skills that may be
used in everyday life, in the community and in the workplace. Learners also develop the ability to think objectively and
use a variety of forms of reasoning while they use these skills. Learners can gain these skills in an environment that
taps into their curiosity about the world, and that supports creativity, responsibility and growing confidence.

 10 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
The following are the cognitive and practical process skills that learners will be able to develop in Natural Sciences

1. Accessing and recalling information – being able to use a variety of sources to acquire information, and to
 remember relevant facts and key ideas, and to build a conceptual framework

2. Observing – noting in detail objects, organisms and events

3. Comparing – noting similarities and differences between things

4. Measuring – using measuring instruments such as rulers, thermometers, clocks and syringes (for volume)

5. Sorting and classifying – applying criteria in order to sort items into a table, mind-map, key, list or other format

6. Identifying problems and issues – being able to articulate the needs and wants of people in society

7. Raising questions – being able to think of, and articulate relevant questions about problems, issues, and
 natural phenomena

8. Predicting – stating, before an investigation, what you think the results will be for that particular investigation

9. Hypothesizing – putting forward a suggestion or possible explanation to account for certain facts. A hypothesis
 is used as a basis for further investigation which will prove or disprove the hypothesis

10. Planning investigations – thinking through the method for an activity or investigation in advance. Identifying
 the need to make an investigation a fair test by keeping some things (variables) the same whilst other things
 will vary

11. Doing investigations – this involves carrying out methods using appropriate apparatus and equipment, and
 collecting data by observing and comparing, measuring and estimating, sequencing, or sorting and classifying.
 Sometimes an investigation has to be repeated to verify the results.

12. Recording information – recording data from an investigation in a systematic way, including drawings,
 descriptions, tables and graphs

13. Interpreting information – explaining what the results of an activity or investigation mean (this includes reading
 and understanding maps, tables, graphs). A Translation Task requires learners to make sense of information
 and convert the information into a different format e.g. from information captured on a table into a graph format
 and or written format.

14. Communicating – using written, oral, visual, graphic and other forms of communication to make information
 available to other people

15. The Scientific Process is a way of investigating things about the world. Scientists use this process to find out
 about the world and to solve problems. The steps that make up the scientific process are not necessarily in
 order (sequential), and may include:

 Step 1: Identify a problem and develop a question. What is it you want to find out?

 Step 2: Form a hypothesis. A hypothesis is your idea, answer, or prediction about what will happen and why.

 Step 3: Design an activity or experiment. Do something that will help you test your idea or prediction to see if
 you were right.

CAPS 11
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 Step 4: Observe/note changes/reactions (e.g. through measuring), and record your observations (e.g. onto a
 table). What were the results of your activity or experiment? Write about what happened.

 Step 5: Make inferences about the observations recorded in the tables, graphs, drawings, photographs. Make
 some conclusions. What did you find out? Do your results support your hypothesis? What did you learn from
 this investigation?

Developing Language Skills: Reading and Writing

The ability to read well is central to successful learning across the curriculum. Writing is also a powerful instrument
of communication. Writing allows learners to construct and communicate thoughts and ideas coherently. Frequent
reading and writing practice across a variety of tasks and subjects enables learners to communicate functionally and
creatively.

Learners are required to read and write particular genres of texts (including instructions, reports and explanations)
during Natural Sciences lessons. Learners need regular opportunities to read and write a range of genres in order to
improve their reading and writing skills. The ability to read and write well is also critical when learners are assessed,
both informally and formally.

2.8 Resources

The resources needed for teaching Natural Sciences are listed against each topic in order to assist teachers with
planning and preparation. The list is a guide and suitable alternative tools and materials may be used.

Every learner must have his/her own textbook. Teachers should ensure that a system is in place for recovering
textbooks at the end of every year. Schools must provide secure storage space where textbooks, and other equipment,
can be stored safely.

Every learner should have access to sufficient workspace and equipment to carry out investigations. For safety and
educational reasons it is recommended that no more than three learners share space and equipment. Teachers
should ensure that learners are familiar with rules regarding the safe use of equipment.

Schools must make every effort to ensure that the essential equipment is provided. Tools, apparatus, materials
and consumables must be acquired through a planned budgeting process. Secure storage for equipment must be
provided by the school.

While it is acknowledged that it is not ideal to have to improvise equipment, teachers should remember that it is
more important for learners to have the experience of carrying out a variety of investigations than to depend on the
availability of equipment. In instances where equipment is limited, teachers should be encouraged to improvise. The
same knowledge and skills can be developed using improvised equipment.

In instances where there is no alternative, it is more effective for teachers to demonstrate an investigation than not to
do investigations due to a lack of equipment.

 12 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 2.9 Detailed summary of Natural Sciences concepts and content, and time allocations

 Each term focuses on one Natural Sciences knowledge strand

CAPS
 • The strands are organised to show clear progression of concepts across the Grades and in the phase.

 TERM 1: TERM 2: TERM 3: TERM 4:
 LIFE & LIVING MATTER & MATERIALS ENERGY & CHANGE PLANET EARTH & BEYOND
 TOTAL

 GRADE
 TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS
 • The biosphere 1 • Properties of materials 2 • Sources of energy 1 • Relationship of the Sun to 4
 -- The concept of the -- Physical properties of - Renewable and non- the Earth
 biosphere materials renewable sources of -- Solar energy and the
 -- Requirements for -- Impact on the environment energy Earth’s seasons
 sustaining life` • Potential and Kinetic -- Solar energy and life on
 2
 • Biodiversity Energy Earth
 • Separating mixtures
 -- Classification of living - Potential energy -- Stored solar energy
 3½ -- Mixtures 2
 things - Kinetic energy
 -- Methods of physical
 -- Diversity of animals separation - Potential and kinetic energy • Relationship of the Moon to
 in systems the Earth 2
 -- Diversity of plants -- Sorting and recycling
 • Sexual Reproduction materials - Law of conservation of -- Relative positions
 energy -- Gravity
 -- Sexual Reproduction in
 Angiosperms 3½ • Heat transfer 2 -- Tides
 • Acids, bases and neutrals
 -- Human Reproduction - Heating as a transfer of
 -- Tastes of substances
 2 energy
 7 • Variation -- Properties of acids, bases • Historical development of
 - Conduction astronomy 2
 34 weeks

 -- Variations exists within a and neutrals
 species - Convection -- Early indigenous
 -- Acid-base indicators
 1 - Radiation knowledge
 • Insulation and energy 2 -- Modern developments
 • Introduction to the Periodic
 saving
 Table of Elements
 - Using insulating materials
 -- Arrangement of elements 2
 on the Periodic Table • Energy transfer to
 1
 surroundings
 -- Some properties of metals,
 semi-metals and non- - Useful and ‘wasted’ energy
 metals • The national electricity
 supply system 1
 - Energy transfers in the

 13
 9 8 national grid 9 8
 wks wks - Conserving electricity in the wks wks
 home
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 TERM 1: TERM 2: TERM 3: TERM 4:
 LIFE & LIVING MATTER & MATERIALS ENERGY & CHANGE PLANET EARTH & BEYOND
 TOTAL

 14
 GRADE
 TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS
 • Photosynthesis and 2 • Atoms 2 • Static electricity 1 • The Solar System 3
 respiration
 -- Atoms – building blocks of -- Friction and static electricity -- The Sun
 -- Photosynthesis matter
 • Energy transfer in electrical -- Objects around the Sun
 -- Respiration -- Sub atomic particles systems
 3 -- Earth’s position in the Solar
 • Interactions and -- Pure substances -- Circuits and current System
 interdependence within the electricity
 -- Elements • Beyond the Solar System
 environment 5
 -- Components of a circuit
 -- Compounds -- The Milky Way Galaxy
 -- Introduction to ecology 3
 -- Effects of an electric
 -- Mixtures of elements and -- Our nearest star
 -- Ecosystems current
 compounds
 -- Light years, light hours and
 -- Feeding relationships • Series and parallel circuits
 • Particle model of matter light minutes
 -- Energy flow: Food chains -- Series circuits 2
 -- The concept of the particle -- Beyond the Milky Way
 and food webs
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 model of matter 5 -- Parallel circuits Galaxy
 -- Balance in an ecosystem
 8 -- Change of state -- Other output devices • Looking into space
 -- Adaptations
 34 weeks

 -- Density, mass and volume • Visible light -- Early viewing of space
 -- Conservation of the
 -- Density and states of -- Radiation of light -- Telescopes
 ecosystem
 matter
 -- Spectrum of visible light 2
 • Micro-organisms
 -- Density of different
 -- Opaque and transparent 3
 -- Types of micro-organisms materials
 substances
 -- Harmful micro-organisms -- Expansion and contraction
 -- Absorption of light
 of materials
 -- Useful micro-organisms
 -- Reflection of light
 2 -- Pressure

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 -- Seeing light
 • Chemical reactions 1
 -- Refraction of light
 -- Reactants and products
 9 8 9 8
 wks wks
 wks wks
 TERM 1: TERM 2: TERM 3: TERM 4:
 LIFE & LIVING MATTER & MATERIALS ENERGY & CHANGE PLANET EARTH & BEYOND
 TOTAL

 GRADE
 TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS

CAPS
 • Cells as the basic units of 2 • Compounds 1 • Forces 2 • The Earth as a system 1
 life
 -- The Periodic Table - Types of forces - Spheres of the Earth
 -- Cell structure
 -- Names of compounds - Contact forces • Lithosphere
 -- Differences between plant
 • Chemical reactions - Field forces (non-contact - Lithosphere 2
 and animal cells
 forces)
 -- Chemical equations to 1 - The rock cycle
 -- Cells in tissues, organs and
 represent reactions • Electric cells as energy
 systems ½ • Mining of mineral
 systems
 -- Balanced equations resources
 • Systems in the human body
 - Electric cells
 • Reactions of metals with - Extracting ores
 - Body systems 2 2
 oxygen • Resistance
 - Refining minerals
 • Human reproduction 1
 -- The general reaction of - Uses of resistors
 - Mining in South Africa
 - Purpose and puberty metals with oxygen 1½
 - Factors that affect
 • Atmosphere
 - Reproductive organs 2 -- Reaction of iron with resistance in a circuit
 oxygen - Atmosphere
 - Stages of reproduction • Series and parallel circuits
 -- Reaction of magnesium - Troposphere
 9 • Circulatory and respiratory - Series circuits 2
 with oxygen
 systems
 34 weeks

 - Stratosphere
 - Parallel circuits 2
 -- Formation of rust
 - Breathing, gaseous - Mesosphere
 • Safety with electricity
 exchange, circulation and -- Ways to prevent rusting
 - Thermosphere
 respiration - Safety practices
 • Reactions of non-metals
 - The greenhouse effect
 • Digestive system 1½ with oxygen • Energy and the national
 electricity grid • Birth, life and death of stars
 - Healthy diet -- The general reaction of ½
 non-metals with oxygen - Electricity generation - The birth of a star
 - The alimentary canal and
 digestion -- Reaction of carbon with - Nuclear power in South - Life of a star
 oxygen Africa
 - Death of a star
 -- Reaction of sulfur with 1 1
 - National electricity grid
 oxygen
 • Cost of electrical power
 • Acids & bases, and pH
 - The cost of power
 value
 consumption
 -- The concept of pH value

 15
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 TERM 1: TERM 2: TERM 3: TERM 4:
 LIFE & LIVING MATTER & MATERIALS ENERGY & CHANGE PLANET EARTH & BEYOND
 TOTAL

 16
 GRADE
 TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS TOPIC WKS
 • Reactions of acids with 1 1
 bases: Part I
 -- Neutralisation and pH
 2
 • Reactions of acids with
 bases: Part II
 ½
 -- The general reaction of
 an acid with a metal oxide
 (base)
 1½
 -- Applications
 -- The general reaction of an
 34 weeks

 1
 acid with a metal hydroxide
 (base)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • Reactions of acids with ½
 bases: Part III
 - The general reaction of an
 acid with a metal carbonate
 (base) ½
 9 Reactions of acids with 8 9 8
 wks metals wks wks wks

 Teachers have the freedom to expand concepts and to design and organise learning experiences according to their own local circumstances.

 Examples of indigenous knowledge that teachers select for study should, as far as possible, reflect different South African cultural groupings. They should also link directly

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 to specific content in the Natural Sciences curriculum.

 Notes: * These totals include the 6 hours per term for school-based assessment but exclude the 2 weeks set aside for the mid-year and the end of year examinations

 General: Time spent on each topic should serve as a guideline for weighting of marks in Tests and Exams. The purpose of using times as guidelines is to ensure that all
 topics are assessed.
 SECTION 3: SENIOR PHASE NATURAL SCIENCES CONTENT AND CONCEPTS

 GRADE 7 TERM 1

CAPS
 STRAND: LIFE AND LIVING
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1 week The The concept of the biosphere • describing the components of Earth’s biospheres • Textbooks and
 biosphere other reference
 • the biosphere is where life exists and includes the lithosphere • identifying living organisms found in each sphere
 materials
 (soil and rocks), hydrosphere (water), and atmosphere (gases)
 • describing conditions that sustain life
 • Pictures and/
 • it also includes all living organisms, and dead organic matter
 or video clips
 • there are many different kinds of living things including plants, of Earth and its
 animals, microorganisms biosphere
 • all living things can carry out all the seven life processes:
 nutrition (feeding), growth, reproduction, respiration (energy
 production), excretion, sensitivity (to the environment),
 movement
 Requirements for sustaining life • investigating requirements (such as light, water) for • Seeds, soil and
 the growth of seedlings [germinate seeds and grow containers to grow
 • living things need energy, gases, water, soil and favourable
 the seedlings under different conditions] seeds, rulers or
 temperatures
 measuring tapes
 • living things are suited (adapted) to the environment in which
 they live, such as fish have fins to move easily through water
 3 ½ weeks Biodiversity Classification of living things • grouping a selection of everyday objects according to • Selection
 observable features, for example shape, colour, size, of pictures,
 • plants, animals and microorganisms, and their habitats make
 and use photographs
 up the total biodiversity of the Earth
 or drawings of
 • drawing up a table of the basic differences between
 • living organisms are sorted and classified according to their vertebrates and
 plants and animals
 shared characteristics invertebrates
 • sorting vertebrates and invertebrates using
 • scientists have grouped the organisms into a classification • Magnifying lenses,
 observable characteristics
 system live or preserved
 specimens
 • the five main groups (called Kingdoms) of living organisms
 include Bacteria, Protista, Fungi, Plants and Animals
 • basic differences in processes such as movement, nutrition
 and reproduction, distinguishes plants from animals
 • Kingdoms are further subdivided into Phyla/Divisions, then

 17
 Classes, then Families, then Orders, then Genera, and the
 smallest group is Species
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 18
 Biodiversity Diversity of animals • listing the distinguishing characteristics of the 5 • Reference
 classes of vertebrates materials
 [continued...] • animals are classified as either vertebrates (animals with
 backbones) or invertebrates (animals without backbones) • listing the distinguishing characteristics of the 4 • Selection of plants
 groups (Classes/Phyla ) of invertebrates collected in and
 • vertebrates are subdivided into five classes on the basis of
 around the school
 distinguishing characteristics: observing and describing the land snail
 property
 -- Fish
 • Magnifying lenses
 -- Amphibians
 • Live or preserved
 -- Reptiles specimens
 -- Birds
 -- Mammals
 • invertebrates are subdivided into the Phyla Arthropoda and
 Mollusca, on the basis of distinguishing characteristics
 • arthropods have a hard outer covering (exoskeleton) and
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 jointed legs, such as Insects (locust), Arachnids (spider),
 Crustaceans (crab)
 • Molluscs are soft bodied animals such as snails
 [Note: Classification of all of the invertebrates is not required]
 Diversity of plants
 • plants are classified as plants with seeds (such as maize) or • identifying and describing the observable
 plants without seeds (such as ferns) differences between
 • plants with seeds are Angiosperms (flowering plants) and -- Angiosperms and Gymnosperms
 Gymnosperms (cone bearing plants such as the cycad)
 -- monocotyledons and dicotyledons
 • plants can produce their seeds in flowers (Angiosperms) or in

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 cones (Gymnosperms)
 • Angiosperms consist of two major groups, dicotyledons and
 monocotyledons. These groups differ with respect to their
 roots, stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and seeds
 [Note: Emphasise local and other South African examples]
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 3 ½ weeks Sexual Sexual reproduction in Angiosperms • growing plants such as beans or maize seeds to • A variety of plant

CAPS
 reproduction • seeds are produced in flowers, which are the sexual organs of observe the stages in the life cycle. Measure the specimens
 Angiosperms height of the plant as it grows. Record observations in • Soil
 diagrams, tables and graphs
 • the components of a flower usually include: • Containers to
 • identifying, drawing and describing the components grow plants
 -- male structures called stamens for producing pollen of a flower
 (containing male sex cells) • Seeds (such as
 • comparing the structure of a variety of flowers, and beans and maize)
 -- female structures called stigma (for receiving pollen), style the methods of pollination
 and ovary (for producing female sex cells) • Rulers or
 • describing how flowers are adapted to promote measuring tapes
 -- petals (for attracting pollinators) pollination
 -- sepals (for protecting the flower bud) • describing different fruit, seeds and the method of
 • pollination and fertilisation are essential processes for flowers seed dispersal
 to produce seeds
 • pollination is the transfer of pollen between plants of the same
 species for the purpose of fertilisation
 • wind and water can facilitate pollination
 • pollination can also be aided by pollinators such as insects,
 birds, mammals
 • flowers have special adaptations to promote pollination, such
 as large colourful petals, scent and sweet nectar to attract
 insects and birds
 • pollinators play an important role in the production of food
 crops (such as maize) for humans
 • fertilisation is the fusion of the male and female sex cells to
 produce seeds
 • during fertilization the following happens: each mature pollen
 grain contains two male sex cells. When the pollen attaches
 to the stigma of a flower from the same species, the pollen
 produces a pollen tube, which grows down the neck of the
 style, transporting the male sex cells to the ovule. Within
 the embryo sac of the ovule, one male sex cell fertilizes the
 egg, which develops into a seed. The other male sex cell
 unites with two cells in the embryo sac and this results in the
 development of the endosperm, the starchy food that feeds
 the developing seed. The ovary enlarges and becomes a fruit.
 • the seeds are contained in fruit

 19
 • fruits and seeds are dispersed in various ways
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 20
 Sexual Human Reproduction • drawing a personal time line and locating puberty
 reproduction
 • the main purpose of reproduction is for the sperm (male • discussing and writing about the changes
 [continued...]
 sex cell) and egg (female sex cell) to combine, develop and experienced during puberty
 produce a baby
 • discussing and writing about responsible sexual
 • puberty is the stage in the human life cycle when sexual behaviour
 organs mature for reproduction
 • discussing myths about menstruation and sex
 • humans also experience drastic physical and emotional
 changes during this stage
 • the male reproductive organs include the penis and the testis
 (produces sperm cells)
 • the female reproductive organs include the vagina, uterus,
 ovaries (contain egg cells/ ova)
 • fertilisation is a process when the sperm fuses with the egg
 • the uterus develops a thick layer of blood in preparation for a
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 fertilised egg
 • if fertilisation does not take place, menstruation occurs. The
 thick layer of blood breaks down and is released through the
 vagina
 • if fertilisation takes place, the fertilised egg is embedded
 (implanted) in the blood lining of the uterus. This leads to
 pregnancy
 • pregnancy can be prevented by using contraceptives such as
 condoms to prevent the sperm reaching the egg
 • condoms also prevent the transmission of HIV/AIDS and other
 STDs (sexually transmitted diseases), if used effectively

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 [Note: It is important that learners understand that early sexual
 activity can have serious consequences. Learners need to know
 enough about this topic to be able to make informed decisions
 and responsible choices]
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1 week Variation Variations exists within a species • measuring and collecting information (data) about

CAPS
 the height of learners in the class. Show the results as
 • a species is a category within the classification system.
 a bar graph
 Living things of the same type belong to the same species.
 For example, humans are one species and dogs are another -- collecting information (data) about the height of adults
 species in the immediate family of the learners
 • individuals of the same species can reproduce to make more -- correlating the height of their family members with the
 individuals of the same species height of learners in the class
 • all people are human (Homo sapiens) and belong to the same • recording information about how many learners are
 species able (or not) to roll their tongues
 • differences between living things of the same species is called -- calculating the percentage of learners in the class
 variation who are able to roll their tongues
 • variation amongst humans can be inherited. Some inherited -- recording information about tongue rolling amongst
 characteristics are height and tongue-rolling members of the families of the learners
 -- calculating the percentage of family members in a
 family who are able to roll their tongue or not
 • discussing about careers in the chemical industry,
 including agriculture, pharmacy or the food industry,
 chemical engineering, mining [not for assessment
 purposes]
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • describe conditions that support life
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly
 • name the different components of the biosphere
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the
 • sort plants and animals into groups based on observable similarities
 learner’s notebook
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for • give the distinguishing characteristics of the five vertebrate classes
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly. • give the distinguishing characteristics of the selected invertebrates
 Allow for a maximum of 6 hours to be used for assessment throughout the term. • name, describe and provide the function of the components of the flower
 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4. • distinguish between pollination and fertilization
 • relate the structure with the function of the reproductive organs of humans
 • define the terms puberty, menstruation, fertilization, pregnancy and
 contraception
 • link the presence of differences between living things of the same species to
 variation

 21
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 GRADE 7 TERM 2
 STRAND: MATTER AND MATERIALS

 22
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 2 weeks Properties of Physical properties of materials • investigating and comparing the strength of selected • Textbooks
 materials materials [by dropping weights onto, or hanging
 • properties of materials determine their suitability for a • Selection of
 weights on materials such as different shopping bags,
 particular use such as: (refer to Grade 5 Energy & Change) materials for
 aluminium foil, newspaper, photocopier/printer paper,
 example:
 -- strength plastic wrap, wax paper]
 Paper, cardboard,
 -- flexibility • reading about the boiling and melting points of
 copper wire, wood,
 different materials such as salt, water, ethanol,
 -- boiling and melting points rubber, plastic,
 paraffin, iron, copper, gold, silver, lead
 stone/clay, brick,
 -- electrical conductivity
 • investigating what happens when water heats glass, aluminium
 -- heat conductivity up and boils [heat water and take the temperature foil, wax paper,
 reading every 3 minutes until the temperature reading rope/string
 • the boiling point of a substance is the temperature at which becomes constant for three readings]. Record time
 the liquid starts boiling (boiling is a rapid change in state from intervals and temperature readings in a table, and • Heat sources
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 a liquid state to a gas state) draw a line graph [Note: you can do the same with • Tripod stands,
 • other factors (such as cost, colour and texture) are also taken other liquids such as orange juice, apple juice, cola] gauze and glass
 into account when using materials containers
 Impact on the environment • Thermometers
 • the production and/or use of materials such as metals, plastics • reading and writing about how a material such as a
 and fuels has an impact on the environment metal or plastic or fuel is produced and its impact on
 the environment

 2 weeks Separating Mixtures • designing and explaining about the best ways to
 mixtures separate and collect all the materials from a mixture of
 • a mixture is made up of two or more substances or materials
 sand, iron filings, salt, ethanol and water. Explain why
 that have different physical properties. Where the properties
 you have chosen each method of separation
 differ, the substances can be separated

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • demonstrating distillation by using a Liebig
 Methods of physical separation
 condenser or any other suitable apparatus
 • the physical properties of the materials in a mixture determine • Sieves
 • separating ink by chromatography [use black ballpoint
 the separating method to be used
 ink (or other koki colours), white paper strips and • Filter paper
 • some methods used to separate materials include hand methylated spirits as a solvent]
 • Funnel
 sorting (separating sheep wool from thorns), sieving
 (separating stones from sand), filtration (separating sand from • Glass or plastic
 water) (refer to Grade 6 Matter & Materials) jars
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Separating Methods of physical separation [continued...] • Magnets

CAPS
 mixtures • additional methods include • Iron or metal filings
 [continued...] -- using a magnet (separating iron from sand) (or coins)
 -- evaporation (retrieving salt from sea water) • Sugar/salt
 -- distillation (retrieving pure water from sea water). Distillation • Heat source
 always involves boiling and condensation [change from gas • Liebig condenser
 to a liquid] (if available) or test
 -- chromatography (separating different colour pigments from tubes, stoppers
 one colour pigment, such as black and glass and
 rubber tubes
 Sorting and recycling materials • Black ink
 discussing about the many careers in chemistry,
 • it is every person’s responsibility to dispose of waste in a mining, waste management [not for assessment • Koki colours
 proper way purposes] • Methylated spirits
 • only certain materials are suitable for recycling, such as
 metals, plastics and glass. Organic waste can be made into
 compost. Material which cannot be recycled has to be dumped
 • local authorities have systems for sorting and disposing of
 waste materials
 • there are negative consequences associated with poor
 waste management such as pollution of water, soil and the
 environment; health hazards and diseases; blockage of
 sewage and water drainage systems; waste of land used
 for landfills; wastage of valuable materials which could be
 recycled
 2 weeks Acids, bases Tastes of substances • Red litmus paper
 and neutrals • the human tongue can sense four different tastes, salty, sweet, • Blue litmus paper
 sour and bitter • Glass containers
 [There is a survival advantage to being able to distinguish these • Liquids such
 tastes, such as selecting a ripe apple which usually tastes as: tea, rooibos,
 sweet, but discarding an unripe one which tastes sour] coffee, milk, fruit
 [Note: not all substances are safe to taste] juices, fizzy drinks,
 Properties of acids, bases and neutrals • investigating common beverages to determine • Household
 whether they are acids, bases or neutrals (such substances such
 • acids and bases are an important group of chemicals as water, tea and rooibos, coffee, milk, fruit juices, as: vinegar,
 • many foods and household chemicals can be classified as fizzy drinks) to test whether they are acids, bases or tartaric acid,
 acids, bases, or neutrals depending on their properties neutrals lemon, antacids,

 23
 • using red and blue litmus paper. Record results on a shampoo, soap,
 table and draw conclusions bicarbonate of
 soda, liquid soap
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 24
 Acids, bases Properties of acids, bases and neutrals [continued...] • investigating a range of household substances (such
 and neutrals as vinegar, tartaric acid, aspirin, antacids, shampoo,
 • acids (such as lemon and other fruit juices, vinegar, tartaric
 soap, bicarbonate of soda, salt water, sugar water,
 [continued...] acid, swimming pool acid) have the following properties
 liquid soap) to test whether they are acids, bases
 -- taste sour or neutrals using red and blue litmus paper. Record
 results on a table and draw conclusions
 -- feel rough on the skin
 [Detergents/soaps are expected to test basic, but
 -- many are dangerous to taste or feel (are corrosive)
 some have additives such as lemon juice and
 • bases (such as bicarbonate of soda, washing powder, most therefore may test acidic instead. Check on packaging
 soaps, bleach and household cleaners) have the following labels]
 properties
 -- taste bitter
 -- feel slippery on the skin
 -- many are dangerous to taste or feel (are corrosive)
 [soluble bases are called alkaline/s]
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • neutrals (such as pure water, salt solution, sugar solution,
 cooking oil) are neither acids nor bases
 Acid-base indicators
 • red and blue litmus paper can be used to test/indicate whether
 a substance is an acid, a base or a neutral
 -- red litmus paper remains red in an acid and a neutral, but
 turns blue in a base
 -- blue litmus paper remains blue in a base and a neutral, but
 turns red in an acid
 • we always use both red and blue litmus to test a substance

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 2 weeks Introduction Arrangement of elements on the Periodic Table • reading about and learning the names and symbols • Periodic Tables

CAPS
 to the of the first 20 elements of the Periodic Table [learners
 • the Periodic Table of Elements is a classification system for • Three colours of
 Periodic need NOT memorise the atomic number of each
 the elements which make up matter and materials in the world pencils / crayons
 Table of element]
 [an element is a pure substance which cannot be broken down
 Elements
 further] • categorising the elements in a copy of the Periodic
 Table by colouring each category (metals, semi-metals
 • the Periodic Table was devised by Dmitri Mendeleev in the
 and non-metals) in different colours
 1860s. He arranged the elements according to their properties
 in a table format • identifying a number of elements from the Periodic
 Table used in everyday life/ the household. Describe
 • the elements of the Periodic Table are arranged into three
 them in writing
 main categories; metals, semi-metals and non-metals:
 -- metals are arranged on the left hand side of the table
 -- non-metals are found on the far right hand side of the table
 -- semi-metals are found in the region between metals and non-
 metals
 • each element has its own name, symbol, atomic number and
 position on the Periodic Table
 Some properties of metals, semi-metals and non-metals
 • metals are usually shiny, ductile and malleable, solid (except
 mercury) and have high melting and boiling points
 • non-metals have a variety of different properties (depending
 on whether they are solids or gases)
 • semi-metals are solids and have some properties of metals
 and some properties of non-metals
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • measure the temperature of water as it heats up to boiling point, draw accurate
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly line graphs, understand and explain the results
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the • explain the separation processes correctly and write about how to separate
 learner’s notebook and collect sand, iron filings, salt, ethanol and water from a mixture
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for • discuss one important consequence of poor waste management for the
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly. environment
 As this is an exam term, the final two weeks may be required for revision. • classify several common beverages/ household substances into acids or
 bases or neutrals using an indicator
 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4.For more detailed

 25
 guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4. • identify metals, semi-metals and non-metals on the Periodic Table of elements
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 GRADE 7 TERM 3
 STRAND: ENERGY AND CHANGE

 26
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1 week Sources of Renewable and non-renewable sources of energy • listing non-renewable energy sources. Explain why • Textbooks and
 energy • energy is needed to make everything work, move or live they are regarded as non-renewable reference materials
 • a source of energy has energy stored waiting to be used, or • listing renewable energy sources. Explain why they • Pictures and
 energy that is needed to make something happen are regarded as renewable reading texts about
 non-renewable and
 -- non-renewable sources of energy cannot be replenished
 renewable sources
 once used, such as fossil fuels (coal, oil, natural gas) and
 of energy
 nuclear fuels (such as uranium) [Links to Planet Earth and
 Beyond Grade 7 term 4]
 -- renewable sources of energy are continually replenished,
 such as hydro power, wind, sunlight, biofuel (wood)
 2 weeks Potential Potential energy • finding the energy content in different foods, by • Rubber bands
 and Kinetic • potential energy is energy that is stored in a system, such as reading the labels on food packaging • Various food
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 Energy in a stretched rubber band, a weight balanced on the edge of packaging with
 a table, a cell (battery), fuel labels showing
 • there is also potential energy in food [all energy is measured energy content
 in a unit called the joule (J)]. The energy content in foods • Cells (batteries)
 is usually labelled on food packaging [Note: definition and
 calculation of joules is NOT required]
 Kinetic energy
 • kinetic energy is the energy that a body has when it is moving, • investigating energy transfers in
 such as when a rubber band snaps back, a weight falls off a -- mechanical systems (such as - scissors cutting
 table, wind blows, water falls, a vehicle moves, current flows paper, a bent ruler can flick a pellet across the
 through a circuit (electricity) classroom, cricket ball hit by a bat)
 Potential and kinetic energy in systems -- thermal systems (such as - a candle heating cold

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • potential and kinetic energy are involved in water in a can, a cup of tea losing heat to the
 surroundings)
 -- mechanical systems
 -- electrical systems (such as - a cell/ battery in a
 -- thermal (heating) systems
 circuit can activate a motor, buzzer or a small torch
 -- electrical systems bulb)
 -- biological systems -- biological systems (such as - a horse eats a plant
 [a system is a set of parts working together] and can move or pull a cart, energy being passed
 along a food chain)
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Potential Law of conservation of energy • comparing features of these systems, and observing • Scissors, paper,

CAPS
 and Kinetic the effects of energy transfers in the different parts and rulers
 • energy can neither be created nor destroyed but can be
 Energy describing:
 converted from one form to another • Candles, cans
 [continued…]
 -- where the input energy comes from
 • energy can be transferred in a system when different parts • Cells (batteries),
 of the system interact with one another and cause changes -- where the energy goes (transfer) conducting wire,
 [Approach should be to provide learners with examples rather motors, torch bulbs,
 -- the energy changes (in terms of potential and kinetic
 than a definition] buzzers
 energy) observed in the system
 • energy can also be transferred from one system to another
 • recording observations in a flow diagram using
 such as from an electrical system to a mechanical system in a
 arrows to show how energy is changed as it is
 motor
 transferred
 2 weeks Heat transfer Heating as a transfer of energy • Video clips from
 the internet to
 • heating is a process in which energy is transferred from a
 show conduction,
 hotter body to cooler body
 convection and
 • the energy transfer continues until both bodies are at the same radiation
 temperature
 • Spirit / Bunsen
 • heat is transferred in three ways by: burner
 -- conduction • Steel, brass,
 aluminium and Iron
 -- convection
 rods
 -- radiation
 • Styrofoam
 Conduction
 • Wood
 • is the transfer of heat between solid objects that are in direct • investigating heat conduction using various metals
 such as aluminium, steel, brass, iron rods and • Plastic
 physical contact with each other
 compare their rates of conduction. Identify variables
 • Wax or Vaseline
 • heat “travels” from the source of heat through the object, or that could affect the findings. [attach a pin to one end
 from one object to another by conduction of each rod with Vaseline. Heat the other end of the • Drawing pins
 rod in a bath of hot water and record the time of how
 • metals are conductors of heat. Some metals conduct heat • Heat conducting
 long it takes for the pin to fall off]
 better than others tins (if available)
 -- draw a bar graph to show the results
 • good conductors are used for making things such as cooking • Wrist watch with
 pots a second hand /
 Stopwatch
 • other materials prevent/slow down conduction of heat, and are
 called insulators of heat (such as plastics and wood). These
 are generally poor conductors of heat

 27
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 28
 Heat transfer Convection • demonstrating convection currents in water in a • Food colouring or
 [continued…] • is the transfer of heat from one place to another by the transparent container crystal of potassium
 movement of liquid or gas particles • drawing and labelling to explain why heaters are permanganate
 -- air and water expand when heated and the particles move best placed near the floor and air conditioners are best • Glass/transparent
 upwards. When cooled they move down again. This is called placed near the ceiling plastic container
 a convection current • demonstrating heat energy transfer through radiation • Candles
 Radiation using a candle • Shiny silver
 • radiation is the transfer of heat and does not require physical surfaces (wrapped
 contact or movement of particles • investigating/demonstrating and measuring the by aluminium foil)
 • the heat from the Sun travels mainly by radiation across empty amount of radiant heat absorbed using dark coloured • Matt black surfaces
 space to the Earth (matt black), light coloured (white, yellow) and shiny (painted matt black)
 (silver) surfaces [make envelopes of different coloured • Thermometers
 • shiny surfaces (such as silver) are good reflectors of radiant
 paper and aluminium foil, insert thermometers, place
 heat and dark surfaces (such as black) absorb heat energy • Cardboard or paper
 in the Sun and measure the temperature increase over
 (links to Light in Grade 8 and FET) and glue
 time].
 • radiation heats up dark surfaces more quickly (absorb heat)
 -- draw a line graph to show the results
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 than it heats up shiny surfaces (reflect heat)
 2 weeks Insulation Using insulating materials • explaining how a solar water heating system works, • Pictures /diagrams
 and energy • heat can be ‘lost’ through conduction, convection and radiation in terms of radiation, conduction and convection [use of solar water
 saving from our bodies and objects such as electric geysers, real examples, pictures or diagrams] heaters
 • heat can also be gained through radiation, conduction and • Video clips from
 convection, for example in solar water heaters • investigating different insulating materials (such as internet
 • people use insulating materials to help minimise heat loss in styrofoam, newspaper, plastic, glass) by how well they • Thermometers
 winter or heat gain in summer keep hot objects hot (such as a cup of tea) or prevent • Insulating materials
 cold objects (such as ice) from heating up. Measure such as styrofoam,
 • insulating materials slow down heat transfer (heat loss or gain) temperature loss or gain and record results. Sequence
 through conduction, convection and radiation. Insulators are newspaper,
 the insulators from very good to poor plastic and glass
 used
 containers, ice

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 -- for making things such as “cool boxes”
 • designing, making and testing a system (“hot box/ • Cooking pot
 -- in the ceilings of buildings, wonder box”) which uses insulating materials to keep (or container),
 -- for clothing (such as coats, jerseys, woolly hats) and food hot for longer or to keep ice cold cardboard box to
 blankets make a ‘hotbox’,
 • conservation of heat energy in homes and buildings can be insulation materials
 -- measure temperature change after some time.
 improved by minimising heat loss in winter and heat gain in such as paper,
 Record results and draw a line graph
 summer fabric, cushions,
 blankets
 • many indigenous, traditional homes and technologies in South
 OR • Materials to build a
 Africa are designed for our climate and to be energy efficient
 -- designing, making and testing a model of a well- model of a house
 insulated house to minimise heat loss • Insulating materials
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1 week Energy Useful and ‘wasted’ energy • researching the waste of energy from different • Pictures or

CAPS
 transfer to machines and appliances such as examples of tools/
 surroundings • systems such as appliances, tools, vehicles, machines provide
 appliances such as
 useful energy outputs -- a car which wastes about 65% of the energy from
 electric drill, electric
 fuel in the form of heat
 • some energy that is transferred in a system can escape to the iron, kettle, food
 surrounding environment as ‘wasted energy’ -- a power station which wastes about 50% of the mixer
 energy from burning coal, to the surroundings
 • the output energy in a system is always less than the
 input energy, because some of the energy escapes to the
 surroundings
 • identifying the input energy, useful output energy and
 • ‘wasted’ energy can escape in the form of heat and/or sound ‘wasted energy’ when systems are operated. [Use real
 examples or pictures of systems such as electric drill,
 -- sound is an example of ‘wasted’ energy in an electric drill, electric iron, kettle, food mixer, candle, engine, paraffin
 food processor, hair dryer lamp]
 -- heat is an example of ‘wasted’ energy in a candle, lamp,
 engine
 1 week The national Energy transfers in the national grid • interpreting diagrams or pictures of the national • Pictures of how
 electricity electricity grid; from the power station to the consumer. electricity is
 • the national electricity grid is a system (circuit)
 supply Explain the energy transfers generated in the
 system • the electricity is supplied in the following sequence power station, to the
 wires of the supply
 -- energy from sources such as coal, oil, gas, nuclear fuels,
 grid, to the electrical
 falling water and wind, is transferred to turbines
 appliances in the
 -- turbines transfer energy to a generator home
 -- a generator changes energy from mechanical movement • Video clips from the
 into electricity and transfers the electricity into the wires of internet
 the national electricity supply grid
 • A dynamo (or
 -- the wires transfer energy to the electrical appliances and pictures of how they
 lights are used)
 • dynamos are small generators, which also change energy
 from mechanical movement to electricity
 • dynamos are used in some bicycle lights and mine helmets,
 and in wind-up torches and radios

 29
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 30
 The national Conserving electricity in the home • suggesting and writing about ways to conserve
 electricity energy in the home/school/community
 • South Africa has a limited supply of electrical energy
 supply
 system • there are many different ways to use energy wisely and to
 save energy at home: by turning off lights and appliances, • discussing about careers in the field of electricity
 [continued…]
 using energy saving light bulbs, wearing warm clothing, power generation (coal, nuclear, wind, water) including
 stopping cold draughts, using energy efficient appliances, engineers, scientists (research), artisans, technicians
 matching pot size to stove plate and using a “hotbox” for [not for assessment purposes]
 cooking
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • distinguish between renewable and non-renewable sources of energy and give
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly examples of each
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the • compare potential and kinetic energy
 learner’s notebook
 • describe the input energy and trace and record the transfer and changes of
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for energy through various energy transfer systems
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly.
 • describe and demonstrate the difference between conduction, convection and
 Allow for a maximum of 6 hours to be used for assessment throughout the term. radiation
 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4. • show how to use insulating materials to minimise heat loss or heat gain
 • identify and describe ways to conserve energy in the home/school/community

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 7 TERM 4

 STRAND: PLANET EARTH AND BEYOND

CAPS
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 4 weeks Relationship Solar energy and the Earth’s seasons • making a model of the globe using a ball showing the • Textbooks
 of the Sun to south and north poles, the equator and the southern and reference
 • the Sun radiates heat and light in all directions
 the Earth and northern hemispheres materials
 • the Earth receives energy from the Sun in the form of heat and
 • Globe / ball
 light (solar energy)
 • demonstrating the passage of the Earth around the • Torch
 • the Earth spins on its axis once per day
 Sun. [A learner can hold a torch (for the Sun) and
 • Pictures and video
 • the Earth’s axis is an imaginary line that goes through the another learner can carry the globe at its tilt]
 clips from the
 centre of the Earth from the north pole to the south pole
 internet of the Sun
 • the Earth’s axis is not vertical, it is tilted from the vertical by an and showing:
 • drawing and labelling diagrams to show the tilt of
 angle of 23,5º
 the Earth and the direct and oblique rays of sunlight -- the Earth’s
 • the tilt of the Earth’s axis does not change as the Earth orbits energy that cause the four seasons passage around
 around the Sun the Sun
 • due to the tilt of the Earth, the intensity of the solar energy -- the changing
 (amount per unit area) that reaches different parts of the Earth amounts of solar
 changes through the year energy reaching
 • differing intensities of solar energy reaching the southern different parts
 and northern hemispheres through the year lead to the four of the Earth
 seasons through the year

 • when the solar energy falls more directly on the southern
 hemisphere, the solar energy is spread over a smaller area
 and it is summer in the southern hemisphere
 • when the solar energy falls obliquely (at an extreme angle) on
 the southern hemisphere, the solar energy is spread over a
 wider area and it is winter in the southern hemisphere
 • the length of the day also depends upon the season. In
 summer, days are longer than in winter. This is also caused by
 the tilt of the Earth’s axis.
 Solar energy and life on Earth • Pictures and video
 clips from the
 • plants absorb light from the Sun and produce energy-
 internet of
 containing food (refer to Grade 8)
 -- the Sun and
 • all plants and animals depend on this process for their energy
 (refer to Grade 8) -- how coal, oil and

 31
 gas are formed
 • the Sun’s energy sustains all life on Earth
 from the Sun’s
 energy
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 32
 Relationship Stored solar energy • drawing a diagram which shows the flow of energy
 of the Sun to from the Sun through to the formation of fossil fuels
 • dead plants and animals can eventually form coal, oil or gas
 the Earth like coal, oil and gas.
 (fossil fuels) after millions of years
 [continued...]
 • this happens when:
 -- the remains of dead plants and animals are covered by
 layers of mud and soil
 -- the layers press down on these remains
 -- more layers lead to increased pressure
 -- increased pressure, over long periods of time, changes
 these remains into coal, oil or gas
 • the coal, oil and gas store energy from the Sun that was • drawing, labelling and writing to explain the
 absorbed by plant s millions of years ago sequence of processes and events that lead to the
 storage of energy from the Sun in coal, oil and gas
 • humans are using this store of energy (coal, oil and gas) faster
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 than it is being formed (non-renewable resource)
 2 weeks Relationship Relative positions • Ball and rope or
 of the Moon string
 • the Moon revolves around the Earth in its orbit
 to the Earth
 • Video clips from
 the internet
 Gravity • demonstrating the pull of gravity by swinging a ball showing:
 attached to rope or string in a circular motion
 • gravity is the tendency of all objects to attract (pull) each other -- the Moon in orbit
 • the pull of gravity depends on how much mass each object around the Earth
 has and how far apart they are -- the Moon’s
 -- more massive objects exert a stronger pull than smaller gravity results in
 objects over the same distance ocean tides on

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Earth
 -- for objects of the same mass, the closer they are to each
 other, the stronger is the pull of gravity between them -- Full Moon and
 New Moon
 • the Earth is held in its orbit around the Sun by the pull of the cause spring
 Sun’s gravity tides
 • the Moon is held in its orbit around the Earth by the pull of the
 Earth’s gravity
 • the Moon also has its own gravity
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 Relationship Tides • using diagrams to write and explain the effects of

CAPS
 of the Moon the Moon’s gravity on the Earth showing the tides
 • tides are the predictable, repeated rise and fall of sea and
 to the Earth
 ocean levels
 [continued…]
 • tides on Earth are caused mainly by the gravity of the Moon
 • the gravity of the Moon pulls on the water in the seas and
 oceans on Earth
 • this pull causes the Earth to experience high and low tides in • Pictures and texts
 the oceans. There are usually two high tides and two low tides about shoreline
 over a day and a night ecosystems
 • when the Moon is aligned with (in line with) the Sun (at Full
 Moon and New Moon), the Sun’s gravity adds to the Moon’s
 gravity. This causes higher than usual high tides and extra-low
 low tides (spring tides)
 • tides sustain unique shoreline ecosystems between the high • writing to explain the effects of the Moon’s gravity on
 and low water levels ecosystems on Earth
 [an ecosystem is a community of living organisms and their
 interaction with the environment]

 33
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 34
 2 weeks Historical Early indigenous knowledge • writing about traditional cultural interpretations and
 development stories about the Sun, Moon and patterns in the sky
 • the Moon and Sun and stars seem to move in predictable
 of astronomy
 patterns
 • people observed these patterns and used them to measure
 time and develop different calendars
 -- a year (a time period that includes the four seasons)
 -- a month (a time period from one full moon to the next full moon)
 -- a day (a time period from one sunrise to the next sunrise)
 • people used these patterns in different ways such as to denote
 a time for planting, finding direction and special holy days
 • people passed this knowledge on using stories
 Modern developments • researching and writing about a significant discovery • Reference
 in astronomy materials on
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • people have made and continue to make important
 significant
 discoveries in astronomy
 discoveries
 • Copernicus suggested that the Sun is at the centre of the relating to
 Solar System (1514) astronomy
 • Galilei made the first telescope to observe planets and their
 moons (1610)
 • Kepler used mathematics to describe orbits accurately (1609)
 • Newton showed that gravity held the Solar System together
 (1687)
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly
 • demonstrate the Earth’s tilt as it orbits around the Sun
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the
 • describe the relationship between solar energy, the Earth’s movement around
 learner’s notebook
 the Sun and the seasons
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly. • demonstrate their understanding of how coal, oil and gas are formed in the
 Earth, starting from the Sun’s energy
 As this is the exam term, the final two weeks may be required for revision.
 • explain the effects of the Moon’s gravity on the Earth, including tides and
 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4. ecosystems
 • discuss significant events around the development of knowledge of astronomy
 GRADE 8 TERM 1
 STRAND: LIFE AND LIVING
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND

CAPS
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 2 weeks Photosynthesis Photosynthesis • writing about the requirements for, and products of • Textbooks and
 and respiration photosynthesis other resource
 • interactions and interdependence in an ecosystem are driven
 materials
 by the need for energy to sustain life
 • the Sun is the important source providing this energy in the
 form of light and heat
 • plants use carbon dioxide (from the air), water (from the soil)
 and energy from the Sun in a series of chemical reactions to
 produce glucose (food). This process is called photosynthesis
 • oxygen gas is released into the air as a by-product
 chlorophyll
 carbon dioxide + water glucose + oxygen
 sunlight

 [No further details are required]
 • plants change glucose into starch, cellulose and other • conducting an investigation to show that leaves • A variety of leaves
 chemical compounds to enable processes such as growth and produce starch [soak the leaf in boiling water, extract
 • Heat source /
 reproduction chlorophyll using ethanol/methylated spirits, add a
 spirit or Bunsen
 few drops of iodine solution]. Write a report using the
 burners
 headings; aim, hypothesis, method, results, conclusion
 Respiration and discussion • Glass containers/
 test tubes
 • food contains energy (potential energy). This energy can be
 released from food by a series of chemical reactions. This • Ethanol/
 • writing about the requirements for, and products of
 process is called respiration methylated spirits
 respiration
 • respiration (in all living organisms) is the process by which • lodine solution
 energy is released from food in a series of chemical reactions
 • White surfaces
 glucose + oxygen energy + carbon dioxide + water • testing for the presence of carbon dioxide in exhaled
 air using clear lime water • Slaked lime (to
 [No further details are required] make lime water)
 • Drinking straws

 35
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 36
 5 weeks Interactions and Introduction to ecology • Pictures
 interdependence of different
 • ecology is the study of interactions of organisms with one
 within the ecosystems
 another and with the physical and chemical environment
 environment (large and small)
 • scientists usually classify the study of ecological interactions showing the living
 into four levels; populations, communities, ecosystem and the and non-living
 biosphere components
 Ecosystems • Thermometers
 • listing abiotic and biotic factors in an ecosystem
 • all ecosystems combined make up the biosphere • Hand lenses
 • selecting and marking off an ecosystem
 • an ecosystem consists of an ecological community that • String (for making
 includes all living organisms (biotic) such as plants and -- identify and describe the abiotic aspects of the quadrats)
 animals, together with the non-living (abiotic) environment ecosystem such as amount of sunlight, water, wind,
 • Rulers/meter
 such as temperature, wind, water, interacting as a system temperature, soil type and slope of the area
 sticks
 • the size of an ecosystem is not specifically defined and it • selecting and marking off an ecosystem [continued...]
 • Sieves
 usually encompasses a specific, limited area (although it can
 -- describe how the abiotic factors of the ecosystem
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 encompass the entire planet) • Hand lenses
 affect the plants and animals
 • ecosystems are defined by the network of interactions among • Field guides for
 -- identify, count and describe the plants and animals
 organisms, and between organisms and their environment identifying plants
 (biotic factors) in the ecosystem
 and animals
 • survival of individual organisms and populations depends on
 -- describe the relationship between the biotic factors
 the its ability to cope with changes (adapt) in its habitat (the
 (such as feeding and shelter) in the ecosystem
 place where an organism lives) or in the ecosystem
 -- identify any human interferences in the area (such as
 litter and pathways)
 -- study a small sample of the soil in the ecosystem
 marked, using a hand lens, and identify any remains
 of dead plants and animals

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Interactions and Feeding relationships • classifying selected examples of organisms into • Pictures of

CAPS
 interdependence their respective feeding groups (such as cows are different local/
 • plants are producers. They make their own food
 within the herbivores) South African
 environment • animals are consumers. They obtain food from plants either organisms
 directly (such as herbivores) or indirectly (such as carnivores)
 [continued...] • Video clips
 • herbivores: feed on plant material (for example cows, horses)
 • carnivores: feed on other animals (living or dead). The group
 includes:
 -- those that hunt other animals (prey) are predators (for
 example leopards)
 -- those that eat dead animals are scavengers (for example
 hyenas, vultures)
 -- insectivores feed mainly on insects and other smaller
 invertebrates such as worms (for example earthworms)
 • omnivores: feed on plants and animals (for example humans)
 • decomposers: breakdown (decompose) the remains of dead
 plants and animals. They recycle important nutrients in the
 environment (for example bacteria, fungi, earthworms)

 37
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 38
 Interactions and Energy flow: Food chains and food webs • identifying a food chain or food web in an • Pictures of plants
 interdependence ecosystem in or near the school grounds. Record the and animals
 • plants (and algae) play an important role in the ecosystem,
 within the observations in different
 as they capture energy from the Sun by the process of
 environment ecosystems,
 photosynthesis • writing and drawing food chains and food webs
 such as forests,
 [continued...] (linking names with arrows) in different ecosystems
 • this energy is passed along a food chain from producers to oceans, deserts
 consumers; decomposers are the last link in this transfer of • drawing and analysing energy pyramids [Note: on
 energy and release energy as heat to the environment average about 10 % of net energy production at one
 trophic level is passed on to the next level]
 • each stage of a food chain is called a trophic level
 • evaluating the impact of various factors (such as
 • energy transfer and energy loss occur at each trophic level
 loss of habitat, loss of species, change of weather or
 • interlinked food chains together form food webs climate) on ecosystems
 Balance in an ecosystem • evaluating the impact on a food web when one of the
 organisms is removed
 • an ecosystem can only accommodate as many organisms as
 its resources (food, water and shelter) can carry, and it will fail • drawing and labelling diagrams of any selected
 if it does not remain in balance plants, and describe in the labels how they are
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 adapted to their environment
 • this balance can be disrupted by natural and human factors
 • reading and writing about how animals are adapted
 -- natural factors include extreme changes in patterns of weather
 to live in extreme environments (camel and polar
 and climate, such as floods, drought, extreme and sudden
 bear); how animals are adapted to being good
 changes in temperatures
 predators (shark and cheetah); and about other animal
 -- human factors include removing organisms from the adaptations such as camouflage and mimicry
 ecosystem (such as poaching), human induced pollution
 • writing about the importance of maintaining
 • these factors can contribute to an imbalance in an ecosystem, biodiversity and sustainable use of natural resources
 seriously impacting on its components and altering its nature
 • writing about irresponsible human practices (such
 Adaptations as inappropriate waste disposal) and their impact on
 ecosystems. Suggest possible solutions
 • adaptation is the change in the structural, functional and
 behavioural characteristics of an organism

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • adaptation allows the organism to survive as it adapts to
 changing conditions within the environment
 • organisms that are unable to adapt to changes within the
 environment die out (become extinct)
 Conservation of the ecosystem
 • environmentalists and others work towards managing
 ecosystems, such as control of alien vegetation and
 preservation of wetlands
 • individuals can contribute to conservation in various ways,
 such as appropriate waste disposal (including recycling, re-
 using)
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 2 weeks Micro- Types of micro-organisms • using hand lenses or micro viewers to examine small • Hand lenses

CAPS
 organisms objects (such as bread mould, mushrooms, newsprint)
 • micro-organisms are living things or
 to understand the concept of magnification (make
 • they are too small to see with the naked eye [they can only be bigger in order to see a microscopic object) • Bio-viewers
 seen under a microscope]
 • examining and analysing photographs and/or
 • there is a variety of micro-organisms, including Viruses, micrographs of micro-organisms. Use scales to
 Bacteria, Protista and Fungi calculate the real size of the organisms

 Harmful micro-organisms • writing about the cause, effects, symptoms and
 treatments of one of the diseases caused by micro-
 • some micro-organisms cause diseases, such as TB (caused
 organisms
 by bacteria), AIDS (caused by HI virus), malaria (caused by a
 protest) • discussing cultural and historical beliefs about
 diseases caused by micro-organisms
 • disease causing organisms are found almost everywhere,
 such as at ATMs, handrails of staircases and toilets • observing micro-organisms by investigating the
 growth of yeast under different conditions [use
 • waterborne diseases (such as cholera and diarrhoea) account
 different amounts of sugar, different temperatures]
 for many child deaths
 and record observations. Write an experimental report
 • effective methods of preventing the spread of diseases caused using the headings; aim, hypothesis, method, results,
 by micro-organisms include washing hands and sterilising conclusion, discussion and applications
 • modern scientists such as Louis Pasteur play an important
 role in identifying and developing cures for some diseases
 Useful micro-organisms
 • some micro-organisms play an essential role in ecosystems, • discussing about the many careers that require
 such as decomposing dead plant and animal matter, thereby knowledge of environmental studies, nature
 recycling nutrients in the soil conservation, zoology, botany, entomology, the
 study of micro-organisms, including agriculture, food
 • some micro-organisms are used by people for making certain industry, medicine [not for assessment purposes]
 foods (such as yoghurt) and medicines (such as penicillin)
 Assesment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and skills Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • explain photosynthesis and respiration
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly
 • explain how to test for starch in leaves
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the learner’s
 • explain important concepts related to ecology, such as ecosystems, habitats,
 notebook
 communities, populations, species, adaptations, extinctions
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly. • distinguish between biotic and abiotic factors of an ecosystem

 39
 Allow for a maximum of 6 hours to be used for assessment throughout the term. • evaluate disruptions to an ecosystem; giving causes, effects and solutions

 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4.
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 GRADE 8 TERM 2
 STRAND: MATTER AND MATERIALS

 40
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 2 weeks Atoms Atoms – building blocks of matter • Textbooks
 and reference
 • all matter is made up of tiny particles called atoms
 materials
 • an element is made up of atoms of the same kind. For
 • Video clips from
 example all the atoms of an element, such as copper, are
 the internet
 identical
 showing
 • an element is a substance that cannot be broken down into animations
 two or more substances by chemical means (An element of atoms and
 cannot be changed into another element by means of a molecules
 chemical reaction)
 • atoms of one element differ from the atoms of all other
 elements
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • all known elements are listed on the Periodic Table of the
 Elements
 Sub atomic particles • making a 2-dimensional model or drawing of an atom • Beads/ dried lentils
 (choose an element from the first 20 elements from or dried peas
 • atoms are made up of smaller sub-atomic particles (protons,
 the Periodic Table) [Use beads or dried lentils or dried
 neutrons and electrons) • Paper plates
 peas pasted with glue onto a paper plate, to make a
 • the central region of the atom is called the nucleus basic model of an atom of a selected element. Show • Glue
 protons and neutrons making up the nucleus, and
 • the nucleus is made up of positively charged particles called
 electrons in the space around the nucleus]
 protons and neutral particles called neutrons
 • negatively charged particles called electrons move around the
 nucleus
 • atoms are neutral because the number of negatively charged

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 particles (electrons) is equal to the number of positively
 charged particles (protons)
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Atoms Pure substances • Plastic “popit”

CAPS
 [continued…] beads or modelling
 • elements and compounds are pure substances
 clay or playdough
 Elements
 • Copper(II) chloride
 • an element is a material that consists of atoms of only one • making models showing the atoms which make up
 • Cell/ battery
 kind, such as hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), carbon (C), sodium molecules (such as O2, H2, N2, H2O, CO2), using plastic
 (Na) and chlorine (Cl) “popit” beads or modelling clay or playdough • Conducting wires
 • all known elements are listed on the Periodic Table of • demonstrating and recording observations of how • Metal plates
 Elements. They are limited in number and are the building a compound can be broken down into elements by (electrodes)
 blocks of millions of compounds electrolysis • Test tubes or small
 • some elements on the Periodic Table of Elements form -- copper(II) chloride (CuCl2) solution decomposes glass containers
 diatomic molecules for example hydrogen (H2), nitrogen (N2), to form copper (Cu) and chlorine (Cl2) [use carbon • Potassium
 oxygen (O2), chlorine (Cl2). These are called molecules of electrodes and a power source of about 3 to 9 volts] permanganate
 elements
 • Heat source (such
 • sometimes atoms react together chemically to form molecules
 and/or as Bunsen burner
 of compounds (such as H2O, CO2)
 or spirit lamp)
 • demonstrating and recording observations of how a
 Compounds
 compound decomposes into elements by heating • Wooden splint
 • a compound is a material that consists of atoms of two or
 -- potassium permanganate (KMnO4) to obtain oxygen • Matches
 more different elements chemically bonded together, such as
 (O2) [Note: oxygen is not the only product]. Test for • Small ceramic/
 water (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), salt (NaCl)
 O2 glass dish (heat
 • the atoms in a given compound are always combined/bonded
 resistant)
 in a fixed ratio such as, in water, where the ratio is always two
 hydrogen atoms (H) to one oxygen atom (O) [Note: a glowing splint is used to test for the presence of
 oxygen gas. It re-lights in oxygen gas]
 • a chemical bond is the force that holds atoms together
 • compounds [such as water (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), salt
 (NaCl)] are formed by chemical reactions
 • compounds can be broken down in a decomposition reaction
 into other compounds or their original elements by heating
 or electrolysis. For example, electrolysis decomposes water
 (H2O) to form hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2)
 Mixtures of elements and compounds
 • elements and compounds are often found mixed together,
 such as in air, sea water, rocks, and in living things
 • mixtures are separated by physical means; compounds can
 be separated by chemical means

 41
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 42
 5 weeks Particle The concept of the particle model of matter • drawing diagrams to represent particles in a solid,
 model of a liquid and a gas, and explain them in terms of
 • atoms and molecules are referred to as particles in the particle
 matter arrangement, movement, forces and spacing using the
 model of matter
 particle model of matter
 • the particle model of matter is a scientific theory used to
 explain that all matter (solids, liquids and gases) is made up of
 particles • drawing a table comparing the particles of gases,
 liquids and solids
 • these particles are too small to see (in a drop of water there
 would be many billions of water particles)
 • the spaces between the particles are empty [Note: these
 spaces do not contain air, they contain nothing]
 • scientists have evidence that suggests that the particles are
 arranged differently in a solid, liquid and a gas
 -- in a solid, the particles
 o are closely packed in a regular arrangement
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 o do not move around but vibrate against each other
 o have strong forces holding them together
 o have small spaces between them
 • in a liquid, the particles
 -- are loosely arranged but still quite close together
 -- can move quite fast and slide past each other
 -- have weaker forces between them
 -- have small spaces between them

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • in a gas, the particles
 -- have no particular arrangement
 -- move very fast
 -- have extremely weak forces between them
 -- have very big spaces between them compared to solids and
 liquids
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Particle • diffusion is a process in which particles in liquids and gases • investigating the rate of diffusion of a gas • Ether

CAPS
 model of move (separate and spread) from a highly-concentrated area compared to a liquid relating the speed of diffusion
 • Measuring
 matter to an area with a lower concentration of those particles to kinetic energy [Throw a small amount of ether
 cylinder/large
 onto a blackboard; the ether gas diffuses through
 [continued…] • diffusion is faster in gases compared to liquids [the concept of glass jar
 the classroom quickly. Or diffuse a small amount
 diffusion also applies in Life & Living, see Respiratory System
 of potassium permanganate in a large measuring • Potassium
 Grade 9]
 cylinder/glass container of water. It takes a few days permanganate
 for the purple colour to be equally distributed]
 Change of state • investigating change of state by heating solid candle • Empty tins
 wax in an empty tin or small tin foil pie dish [the
 • heating and cooling can cause a material to change state • Spirit burners
 hot, liquid wax will then solidify if the heat source is
 • the solid material first changes to a liquid (melting) when removed and it is allowed to cool down] • Foil pie dishes
 heated, and then it changes to a gas (evaporating or boiling)
 • Tripod stands
 on further heating
 [Note: do not heat the wax to very high temperatures • Gauze wire mats
 • the gas first changes to a liquid (condensing) when cooled,
 in order to vaporise it, as the vapour can ignite. If ice is
 and then it changes to a solid (freezing or solidifying) when • Candle wax
 available, it is safer to use. This can be heated to melt
 cooled further
 the ice and to make the water evaporate or boil] • Matches
 • as a solid material is heated, the movement of the particles
 increases which enables them to move past each other and
 form a liquid
 • the particles move much further apart from each other when
 the material changes from the liquid to the gas state
 Density, mass and volume • finding objects with same volume but with different • Sponge,
 mass and compare them (by hand) in terms of their
 • the density of a material describes the amount of mass in a • Polystyrene
 density, such as sponge, polystyrene, wooden and
 given volume of that material
 metal blocks of the same size • Wooden and metal
 Density and states of matter blocks of the same
 size
 • in general, gases are less dense than liquids and liquids are
 less dense than solids [water is an exception as ice is less
 dense than water and therefore it floats]

 43
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 44
 Particle Density of different materials • comparing the densities of different materials (by • Paper / plastic
 model of hand) using identical paper/plastic cups full of air, cups (of identical
 • some materials have low density and some have high density.
 matter water, sand, flour [Note: each cup of material will size)
 For example a loaf of bread has a lower density than a clay
 have a different mass to the others, although all are
 [continued…] brick of the same size • Water, sand, flour
 the same volume. This tells us that the materials in the
 • the individual particles making up one material may have cup are of different densities]
 different masses compared to the individual particles making
 up another material. In addition, there are spaces between the
 particles
 • the density of a material will depend on the kind of particles it
 is made up of and the size of the spaces between them
 • a material which has lower density will float on a liquid which • mixing oil and water to show that oil is less dense • Beakers
 has higher density, for example oil (lower density) will float on than water and therefore oil floats on the water
 • Oil and water
 water (higher density)
 • reading about pollution of water by oil [Note: oil
 spreads out on top of the water and therefore can
 pollute a large body of water on the surface]
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 Expansion and contraction of materials
 • solids, liquids and gases tend to expand when heated and
 contract when cooled
 • particles of liquids and gases are in a state of constant motion
 • as a material is heated, the movement of the particles
 increases and they move further apart, therefore the material • drawing and explaining how expansion and • Ball and ring
 expands contraction takes place in terms of the particle model apparatus
 of matter [use a metal ball and ring apparatus for
 • as a material is cooled, the movement of the particles
 demonstration]
 decreases and they move closer together, therefore the
 material contracts

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • when a material expands or contracts, the size and number
 of particles does not change. Instead, it is only the spaces
 between the particles that get bigger or smaller
 -- during expansion, the spaces between the particles get
 bigger
 -- during contraction, the spaces between the particles get
 smaller
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Particle Pressure • demonstrating what happens as we blow up a • Balloons

CAPS
 model of balloon or pump up a soccer ball or bicycle tyre using
 • a gas exerts a pressure because of the collisions of the • Soccer ball
 matter a hand pump [As more air is blown or pumped in,
 particles with each other and against the sides of the container
 blowing and pumping becomes more difficult]. Draw • Bicycle tyre
 [continued…]
 • pumping more gas into a container increases the number of and write to explain why it becomes more difficult
 • Hand pump
 gas particles in the container. This increases the number of
 collisions and therefore increases the pressure
 [Note: heating also increases the pressure by giving the
 particles more energy, making them move faster, and collide
 with greater force. We do not have to deal with this aspect of
 pressure in this grade]
 1 week Chemical Reactants and products • investigating the chemical reaction that takes • White vinegar
 reactions place when a whole egg is placed in white vinegar
 • substances can react with each other to form products with • Egg
 [the reactants, vinegar and the egg shell (calcium
 different chemical properties
 carbonate) react together to produce the products, • Beaker
 • in a chemical reaction, the substances that react with one carbon dioxide gas and a solution (calcium acetate)].
 another are called the reactants Make drawings to show what was observed. Show
 reactants (before) and products (after) the reaction
 • in a chemical reaction, the substances that are produced are
 has taken place
 called the products of the reaction
 • investigating what happens when you blow with a
 • in reactions, re-arrangement of the atoms takes place, to form
 drinking straw through clear limewater in a beaker/
 different products
 flask [the reactants, carbon dioxide and calcium
 • during a chemical reaction, chemical bonds (a bond is a force hydroxide react together to form the products, a white • Drinking straw
 that holds atoms together) of the reactants break and new suspension of calcium carbonate and water]. Make
 drawings to show what was observed. Show reactants • Clear limewater
 bonds form to produce the products
 (before) and products (after) the reaction has taken • Beakers / flasks
 • indigenous knowledge includes some examples of useful place
 chemical reactions such as fermentation in brewing [which
 produces carbon dioxide and ethanol (alcohol)] [This links to Life & Living Grade 9, Respiratory
 System – lime water test for carbon dioxide]
 [The concept of chemical reactions is developed in Grade 9]
 • discussing / reading about careers in inorganic and
 organic chemistry, mining, engineering, materials
 development and in the bio-fuels industry [not for
 assessment purposes]

 45
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 46
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • describe the basic structure of an atom
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly
 • give examples of molecules of elements and molecules of compounds
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the
 • explain the difference between elements and compounds, and mixtures and
 learner’s notebook
 compounds
 School based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly. • use the particle model of matter to describe different states of matter and
 explain change of state, density and pressure
 As this is an exam term, the final two weeks may be required for revision.
 • identify reactants and products in a simple chemical equation
 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 8 TERM 3
 STRAND: ENERGY AND CHANGE
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND

CAPS
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1week Static Friction and static electricity • rubbing a plastic or perspex ruler with a piece of wool • Textbooks and
 electricity • friction (rubbing) between certain materials (such as plastic, or nylon or silk fabric. Bring the ruler close to small reference materials
 perspex, glass, nylon, wool, silk) transfers electrons between pieces of tissue paper or sawdust. Observe what • Video clips from the
 the atoms of the two materials being rubbed together happens and describe in terms of same or opposite internet
 charge on the materials [Note: Learners do not need
 • the electrons move from one material causing a positive to memorise what charge the materials acquire when • Plastic or perspex
 charge on its surface, and causing a negative charge on the rubbed together] rods or rulers
 surface of the other material [It is only the electrons that are • Pieces of wool/
 transferred, protons and neutrons do not move] nylon/silk fabric
 • objects/materials with same/like charges repel each other • Small pieces of
 • objects/materials with opposite/unlike charges attract each paper
 other
 • a discharge of the electrons causes the sparks or shock of
 static electricity, especially when the air is dry
 3 weeks Energy Circuits and current electricity • drawing and interpreting an electrical circuit diagram • Electrical circuit
 transfer in • a circuit is a system for transferring electrical energy and the symbols used in it diagrams
 electrical
 systems • a closed circuit is needed to make a device work, such as
 making a bulb light up (refer to Grade 6 Energy & Change)
 • a circuit is a complete conducting pathway for electricity and
 has a number of components connected together:
 -- from one terminal at the source of energy (cell/battery)
 à along conducting material (wires) à through the device
 (filaments of incandescent bulbs) à back to the other
 terminal of the source of energy (cell/battery)
 Components of a circuit
 • conducting wires are usually made of metal and carry
 electricity over a short or long distance
 • switches provide a convenient way of controlling electrical
 circuits
 • cells/batteries are chemical systems that are sources of
 energy
 -- cells store chemical substances (potential energy)
 -- when the circuit is completed, the chemicals react together

 47
 to produce an electric current
 -- an electric current is the flow of charges (kinetic energy)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 along a conductor
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 48
 Energy Components of a circuit [continued...]
 transfer in • resistors are made of materials that resist/oppose the flow of
 electrical electrical current in a circuit
 systems
 -- resistors in a circuit have an influence on the amount of
 [continued…] electric current flowing in that circuit
 -- some resistors (including bulb filaments, heating wires,
 elements in kettles/heaters/geysers/stoves) can heat up to
 provide useful output energy
 o a light bulb such as a torch bulb, contains a resistance
 wire called a filament. The filament heats up to be white
 hot when connected in a circuit. The resistance wire is
 connected to two contact points - the one end to the screw
 part (casing) and the other end to the solder knob at the
 bottom. The two contacts are separated by an insulator

 Effects of an electric current • reading about how fuses work • Cells/batteries
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • a current can heat a resistance wire (such as a bulb filament) • investigating the heating effect of a current by using • Circuit boards
 -- an electrical current transfers energy to the particles in a a resistance wire (such as a strand of steel-wool/ • Torch bulbs
 bulb filament, producing light that the filament emits nichrome wire)
 • Switches
 -- circuits can overheat if a short circuit occurs: -- observe, record and write about the effect
 • Resistors (steel
 o fuses are special wires which break the circuit when they -- predict or interpret information about other wool or nichrome
 overheat and melt. These are safety devices that reduce applications wire)
 the danger when using electricity • investigating the magnetic effect of a current in a wire • Copper wires
 o a short circuit can occur when an electric current bent into a coil
 • Steel wires
 takes the path of lowest resistance, for example when a -- observe and record its effect on a magnetic
 • Copper(II)chloride
 conductor is connected directly to both terminals of a cell/ compass
 battery • Magnetic
 -- predict or interpret information about other
 compasses
 • a current causes a magnetic field (such as in electromagnets) applications

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • other (available)
 -- an electric current can be used for making temporary • investigating electrolysis of copper(II) chloride
 input and output
 magnets known as electromagnets. Moving charges solution
 devices
 (current) in a conductor (such as a wire), cause a magnetic -- observe and record what happens
 field around it
 -- predict or interpret information about other
 • an electric current can cause a chemical reaction in a solution, applications
 this process is called electrolysis
 -- water can be broken down by electrolysis to produce oxygen
 and hydrogen gas
 -- copper(II) chloride solution can be broken down to copper
 metal and chlorine gas. Copper is deposited on one
 electrode (cathode) and chlorine gas is formed as bubbles
 at the other electrode (anode)
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 2 weeks Series and Series circuits [Note: Use simple circuit boards, and draw circuit • Cells/batteries

CAPS
 parallel • a series circuit provides only one pathway for the current diagrams showing all components used, for the following • Circuit boards
 circuits passing through it. The current is the same everywhere in the investigations (the effects of resistance are treated
 qualitatively by observing the brightness of a bulb in the • Torch bulbs
 circuit but every time a resistor is added in series, the overall
 current in the circuit decreases circuit)] • Switches
 • Resistors (various
 • investigating a series circuit by observing the effects conducting wires,
 Parallel circuits steel wool or
 of connecting more resistors (such as bulbs) into the
 • a parallel circuit provides two or more pathways for the current circuit (observe the brightness of the light bulbs as nichrome wires)
 passing through it, but the overall current increases when more bulbs are added) • Copper wires
 more resistors are added in parallel
 -- insert more bulbs in series into the circuit • Steel wires
 • investigating a parallel circuit by observing the effects
 Other output devices of connecting more resistors (bulbs) in parallel into
 • other complex circuits are used for output devices such as the circuit (observe the brightness of the light bulbs as
 beepers, buzzers, LEDs (Light Emitting Diodes) or motors more bulbs are added)
 -- insert more bulbs in parallel into the circuit
 • comparing the effects of resistors in series and in
 parallel by recording observations in a table
 • investigating how different metals conduct electricity
 differently (all conductors have some resistance) in a
 series circuit. Observe the effects on the brightness of
 the light bulbs
 -- insert different conductors (wires such as copper,
 nichrome) into a series circuit
 • researching and writing about notable events in the
 history of electricity in South Africa and elsewhere
 • finding out about careers in electrical engineering,
 (such as electricians) electronics, electricity supply
 maintenance [not for examination purposes]
 3 weeks Visible light Radiation of light • drawing a ray diagram to explain the image formed • Video clips from
 in the tissue paper at the back of the pinhole camera the internet
 • light is emitted from luminous objects such as the Sun and
 [Teacher can demonstrate using a pinhole camera] about the electro-
 light bulbs, and is transferred by radiation
 magnetic spectrum
 • light travels in straight lines • Pinhole camera (if
 • light travels through empty space at a speed of 300 000 available)
 kilometres per second (the distance from the Sun to Earth is • Cardboard box

 49
 150 million kilometres) (refer to Grade 7 Energy and Change) (shoe box)
 • Tissue paper
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • Glue
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 50
 Visible light Spectrum of visible light • observing and recording the sequence of colours • Pin
 [continued...] • white light consists of a spectrum (range) of different in the visible spectrum when light is shone through a • Tinfoil (to make a
 frequencies and wavelengths - violet, indigo, blue, green, triangular prism pinhole camera)
 yellow, orange, red. All these colours make up the spectrum • Light source
 of visible light [Note: NO further detail on wavelengths and
 • Cardboard with
 frequencies is required at this level]
 narrow slit
 • a rainbow is seen when light falls on water droplets in the air
 • Triangular prism
 and is refracted and dispersed into the different colours (violet,
 indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, red) seen in the rainbow
 • the light at the violet, indigo, blue range of the spectrum has
 the highest frequency (shortest wavelength) and orange and
 red light has the lowest frequency (longest wavelength)
 Opaque and transparent substances • drawing diagrams to show how shadows are cast by • Light source
 • light cannot pass through opaque surfaces (such as metal, opaque objects. • Cut-out cardboard
 clay, bricks, wall paint, cardboard), therefore it is either • predicting effects of moving the object (such as a shapes
 absorbed or reflected cardboard shape) closer or further away from the light
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • opaque substances cast shadows on the side facing away source
 from the light source
 • light passes through transparent substances (such as glass,
 clear plastic, cellophane, clean water), therefore some of the
 light is absorbed, some is reflected, but most passes through

 Absorption of light • Textbooks
 • light can be absorbed by surfaces of some materials and reference
 materials
 • light is absorbed differently by different materials
 • Video clips from
 • a material has colour because it absorbs some of the colours
 the internet
 in the spectrum (some of the frequencies) and reflects other

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 colours
 • the frequencies that are absorbed do not reach the eye
 -- a red object (such as a wall painted red) reflects the
 frequencies we see as red and absorbs other frequencies/
 colours such as violet, indigo, blue, green
 -- a black object (such as a black pot) absorbs all of the
 frequencies/colours and therefore looks black [links to
 absorption of heat by matt black surfaces: Grade 7]
 -- a white object (such as white paper) reflects all of the
 frequencies/colours and therefore looks white [links to
 reflection of heat by shiny silver or white surface Grade 7]
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Visible light Reflection of light • drawing a ray diagram to show the change in direction • Mirror

CAPS
 • light is reflected off most surfaces, including mirrors of light rays at a smooth reflector (such as a mirror) • Light source
 [continued...]
 • light can change its direction when it is reflected • Aluminium foil
 • in reflection, the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection • drawing a ray diagram to show the changes in
 are equal direction of light rays reflected off a rough surface
 (such as crumpled aluminium foil). Reflected light is
 • the angles of incidence and reflection are measured from the scattered in different directions
 normal which is a line perpendicular to the surface [actual
 measurement of angles not included here]
 • on smooth surfaces, all light is reflected in the same direction
 • on rough surfaces, reflected light is scattered
 Seeing light • explaining why
 • the frequencies/colours that are reflected enter the eye -- a blue car looks blue
 • specialised receptor cells in the eye’s retina are stimulated by -- a sunflower is yellow
 specific frequencies (colours) -- leaves are green
 • in the eye, light energy is converted to electrical nerve [Similar examples may be used]
 impulses
 • impulses travel to the brain and the brain interprets them as
 our perceptions of light
 • the frequencies/colours of light that are absorbed by the
 surface of an object do not reach the eye

 Refraction of light • demonstrating the change in the direction of a light • Reference
 • light can be refracted by transparent substances ray (beam) through a parallel sided prism materials
 • light can change its direction when it is refracted • inserting a pencil/ruler in a glass of clean water and • Video clips from
 observing the apparent change in position of the the Internet
 • light entering a transparent medium (such as glass, water, pencil/ruler below the surface of the water, as a result
 perspex) at an angle, changes direction towards the normal in • Parallel sided
 of refraction prism
 that medium
 • light travelling out of the medium (back into the air) changes • Light source
 direction away from the normal • drawing a ray diagram of a triangular prism and • Cardboard with a
 a magnifying glass (lens) to show dispersing and narrow slit or glass
 • a triangular prism is able to refract and disperse white light focusing of light
 into the colours observed in a rainbow • Pencil or ruler
 • a lens is able to refract and focus light • Clear container
 • discussing about careers in optics, physics, optical with water
 transmission of information (fibre optics)

 51
 [not for assessment purposes]
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 52
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the Learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • name the components in an electrical circuit, explain how they are connected
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly to form a complete conducting pathway and interpret the symbols used in a
 circuit diagram correctly
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the
 learner’s notebook • show and describe how to:
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for -- make a simple fuse
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly.
 -- make a simple electromagnet
 Allow for a maximum of 6 hours to be used for assessment throughout the term.
 -- carry out electrolysis
 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4.
 • describe the role of a resistor in a circuit
 • demonstrate and explain the effects on the brightness of the light bulbs when
 connected in a series circuit compared to when connected in a parallel circuit
 • describe the visible spectrum of light formed when light is shone through a
 triangular prism
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • explain the colour of an object in terms of absorption and reflection of light
 • demonstrate and explain the refraction of light

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 8 TERM 4
 STRAND: PLANET EARTH AND BEYOND
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND

CAPS
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 3 weeks The Solar The Sun • Textbooks
 System and reference
 • the Sun is like all other stars – it produces large amounts of
 materials
 heat and light continuously
 • Video clips from
 • the energy in our Sun comes from powerful nuclear reactions
 the internet
 during which hydrogen gas changes into helium gas
 showing:
 Objects around the Sun • constructing a model of the Solar System showing -- Surface of the
 relative distances of the planets from the Earth and Sun
 • a variety of objects orbit the Sun - eight planets and their
 relative sizes of planets
 moons, rocky asteroids, outer dwarf planets and many distant -- Movement of the
 icy and dusty objects in the Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud, at the planets around
 edge of the Solar System the Sun
 • interpreting a table of facts about the Solar System
 • all the planets and other objects in the Solar System have their -- Meteors,
 own special features including size, distance from the Sun, asteroids,
 number of moons known, composition, surface temperature, • comparing and writing about the conditions on other comets
 time it takes for one orbit around the Sun planets in our Solar System including their special
 features • Table of facts
 • comets from the Oort Cloud come close to the Sun from time about the Solar
 to time System
 • the Solar System looks like a flat disc or plate. The Sun spins OR
 (rotates) at the centre and the planets and all other objects
 orbit around it in the same direction
 • presenting a fact sheet about any object found in our
 • gravity is the force that keeps all these objects in their stable, Solar System
 predictable orbits around the Sun
 Earth’s position in the Solar System • writing about why the conditions on Earth are ideal
 for life
 • the Earth is the third planet from the Sun
 • the Earth is the only planet that is known to support life
 • the conditions that support life on Earth include:
 -- temperature: Earth’s distance from the Sun provides the ideal
 temperature range
 -- water is a liquid, gas or solid in Earth’s temperature range
 -- sunlight provides the energy in the food chain

 53
 -- oxygen: early life forms and algae produced enough oxygen
 for the evolution of more sophisticated life forms
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 54
 3 weeks Beyond the The Milky Way Galaxy • demonstrating the shape of the Milky Way Galaxy • Video clips from
 Solar System • our Solar System is in the Milky Way Galaxy with a spiral shape the internet
 showing:
 • a galaxy is a collection of stars held together by their mutual
 gravity -- Images of the
 Milky Way Galaxy
 • our Sun is only one of billions of stars in the Milky Way Galaxy
 -- Images of other
 • the Milky Way Galaxy is in the shape of a spiral with many galaxies
 arms
 • our Sun is located towards the edge of the Milky Way Galaxy
 in one of the spiral arms
 • drawing spiral arms to represent the Milky Way
 • from the Earth, looking towards the centre of the Milky Way Galaxy and placing our Solar System in the outer
 Galaxy, we see a hazy path of light across the sky edges of the spiral to show our its location in the
 • ancient Greeks described it as spilled milk galaxy
 Our nearest star
 • the Sun is the nearest star to Earth
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • the star called Alpha Centauri is the nearest easily visible star
 to the Sun (it is the brighter of the two Pointers of the Southern
 Cross constellation)
 • Alpha Centauri is 4,2 light years away from our Solar System
 Light years, light hours and light minutes
 • people use light years to measure distances to stars and other
 objects beyond the Solar System
 • a light year is the distance that light travels in one year
 • one light year is equal to about 10 trillion kilometres (km)
 • Alpha Centauri is 42 trillion km away
 • a light hour is the distance that light travels in one hour

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • our Solar System has a diameter of about 13 light hours
 • a light minute is the distance that light travels in one minute
 • the Earth is about 8 light minutes away from the Sun
 Beyond the Milky Way Galaxy
 • our Milky Way Galaxy is only one of billions of galaxies
 scattered across the Universe
 • the size of the observable Universe is estimated to be about
 28 billion light years
 • galaxies have various shapes and sizes
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 2 weeks Looking into Early viewing of space • using star maps of the Southern Sky to identify a • Video clips and

CAPS
 space few easily recognisable constellations such as the images from the
 • people can see planets and stars in the night sky
 Southern Cross, Orion and also the planets internet such as:
 • stars can be arranged into visible constellations
 -- Constellations
 • different cultures have identified and named certain
 OR -- SALT telescope
 constellations
 -- Hubble
 • some constellations have stories linked to them
 telescope
 • observing, recording and comparing the
 Telescopes
 appearance of the Southern Cross constellation by -- SKA telescope
 • people can see more details in the sky when they use a viewing it at least three times during the months of
 • Star maps from
 telescope September and October
 the internet
 • a telescope forms an image of the object and magnifies it
 (makes it look bigger)
 • there are different types of telescopes including: • drawing with labels to explain how a telescope works
 [choose any type of telescope]
 -- optical telescopes receive light and focus it by refraction
 (using lenses) or reflection (using mirrors) such as SALT
 (Southern Africa Large Telescope), and the Hubble Space
 • presenting an information poster on a telescope,
 telescope
 explaining how it is used and noting the most
 -- radio telescopes receive radio waves and focus them by important information it has captured
 reflection (typically using a metal receiving dish) such as the
 SKA (Square Kilometre Array)
 • discussing the many opportunities in South Africa for
 • good conditions for looking into space include cloudless skies careers in astronomy
 with limited light and air pollution
 [not for assessment purposes]
 • South Africa has many locations that meet these requirements
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • interpret information about the special features of the planets and objects in
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly our Solar System and describe them
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the • explain why life can exist on planet Earth
 learner’s notebook
 • describe the main features of a star, the Milky Way Galaxy, and beyond the
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for Milky Way Galaxy
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly.
 • explain the concept of light minutes, light hours and light years
 As this is an exam term, the final two weeks may be required for revision.
 • identify and describe the most important telescopes in South Africa
 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4.
 • identify some of the constellations of the Southern Sky

 55
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 GRADE 9 TERM 1
 STRAND: LIFE AND LIVING

 56
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 2 weeks Cells as the Cell structure • making a 3-dimensional (3D) model of a cell • Textbooks and
 basic units other reference
 • the cell is the basic structural and functional unit of all living • drawing, labelling and describing the structure of
 of life material
 organisms. Cells can be seen under a microscope (they are plant and animal cells
 microscopic) • 3 dimensional (3D)
 model of a cell,
 • plant and animal cells have a cell membrane, cytoplasm,
 and/or pictures
 nucleus, and organelles such as mitochondria, vacuoles and
 chloroplasts
 -- the cell membrane encloses the contents of the cell. It allows
 specific substances to pass into and out of the cell
 -- the cytoplasm is the jelly-like medium in which many chemical
 reactions take place
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 -- the nucleus contains DNA
 o the nucleus is enclosed by a nuclear membrane (in plants
 and animals)
 o DNA contains inherited characteristics, such as whether
 eyes are blue or brown
 o DNA is unique to each person; this variation accounts for
 differences within species
 -- Mitochondria are responsible for respiration to release energy
 from food
 Differences between plant and animal cells • identifying and explaining the main differences
 between plant and animal cells
 • plant cells differ from animal cells

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 -- plant and animal cells are enclosed by a cell membrane,
 and plant cells also have rigid cellulose cell walls to provide
 support for the plant
 -- plant cells also contain organelles such as large vacuoles and
 chloroplasts. Chloroplasts contain chlorophyll to absorb light
 energy for photosynthesis (refer to Grade 8 Life & Living).
 Vacuoles in plant cells have several functions including
 support and storage (Vacuoles in animal cells are small and
 temporary or absent)
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Cells as the Cells in tissues, organs and systems • researching and writing about the history of the

CAPS
 basic units • cells come in many different shapes and sizes discovery of the light and electron microscopes
 of life • tabulating functions of the different parts of a basic
 • cells are adapted to perform specific functions, such as
 [continued...] muscle cells which are specialised to contract and enable light microscope
 movement • preparing and examining slides of plant and animal
 • microscopic organisms such as bacteria, consist of a single cells such as onion cells, cheek cells. Draw and label
 cell. Macroscopic organisms such as humans, consist of large a few cells from each observation
 numbers of cells AND/OR
 • a group of cells performing a specific function form a tissue, • examining micrographs of plant and animal cells. • micrographs of
 a group of tissues make up an organ, and organs working Draw and label cells from at least two different tissue plant and animal
 together in groups form systems, systems make up an types cells
 organism
 • researching, discussing and writing about stem cell
 • stem cells are cells that have the ability to divide and develop research and ethical issues involved
 into many different cell types [No detail required]
 2 weeks Systems in [Note: The intention of this topic is to provide learners with an • drawing a large outline of the human body. Draw and • Models or charts
 the human overview of the structure and functions of organs and systems in label each system [as it is dealt with], onto the outline of torso, heart,
 body the human body] [photocopy one outline of the human body for each kidney, digestive
 Body systems learner, as well as a set of systems and organs which system, lungs
 they can cut out and stick onto the outline]
 • the human body consists of several integrated systems
 working together including the following • researching and writing about the health issues
 related to each system
 • digestive system: breaks down food into dissolved nutrients
 that can be absorbed into the blood stream and transported to
 cells throughout the body
 -- the main processes include ingestion, digestion absorption
 and egestion
 -- the main components include the mouth, oesophagus,
 stomach, intestines, liver
 -- health issues include ulcers, anorexia nervosa, diarrhoea,
 liver cirrhosis
 • circulatory system: brings nutrients and oxygen to cells and
 removes waste products
 -- the main processes include circulating blood between heart
 and lungs, and circulating blood between the heart and the
 rest of the body
 -- the main components include the heart, blood vessels
 (arteries, veins, capillaries), blood

 57
 -- health issues include high blood pressure, heart attacks,
 strokes
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 58
 Systems in Body systems [continued...]
 the human
 • respiratory system: is responsible for supplying oxygen to
 body
 the body and for removing carbon dioxide
 [continued...]
 -- the main processes include breathing (inhalation and
 exhalation), gaseous exchange (diffusion) and respiration
 -- the main components include the nose and mouth, trachea
 and other air passageways, lungs, blood
 -- health issues include asthma, lung cancer, bronchitis,
 asbestosis
 • musculoskeletal system: muscles produce body movement.
 The skeleton protects the body, provides support and enables
 movement
 -- the main processes include contraction and relaxation of
 muscles, locomotion and movement
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 -- the main components include the muscles, bones, cartilage,
 tendons, ligaments
 -- health issues include rickets, arthritis, osteoporosis
 • excretory system: removes waste from the blood and
 regulates the body’s fluids 
 -- the main processes include filtration, absorption, diffusion,
 excretion
 -- the main components include the kidneys, bladder, ureters
 -- health issues include kidney failure, bladder infection, kidney
 stones

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • nervous system: receives and helps the body respond to
 stimuli
 -- the main processes include hearing, seeing, feeling, tasting,
 smelling, sending and receiving impulses, regulating
 temperature
 -- the main components include the brain, spinal cord, nerves,
 ears, nose, eyes, skin, tongue
 -- health issues include deafness, blindness, short
 sightedness, effects of drugs and alcohol on the brain
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Systems in Body systems [continued...] producing a poster advocating healthy life style choices

CAPS
 the human
 • reproductive system: produces sex cells for the purpose of
 body
 continuation of the species
 [continued…]
 -- the main processes include growth, cell division, maturation,
 copulation, ejaculation, ovulation, menstruation, fertilisation,
 implantation
 -- the main components include testes, ovaries, uterus
 -- health issues include infertility, foetal alcohol syndrome,
 STDs
 2 weeks Human Purpose and puberty • labelling diagrams and explaining processes § Models or
 Reproduction involved in reproduction charts of the
 • the main purpose of reproduction is for the gametes (male
 reproductive
 and female sex cells) to combine for the continuation of the
 system
 species
 • drawing flow charts to show the sequence of the
 • puberty is the stage in the human life cycle when sexual stages in reproduction
 organs mature for reproduction. This process is initiated when
 the pituitary gland releases hormones into the blood stream,
 triggering the testes and ovaries to release sex hormones • researching and writing about the effects of alcohol,
 (testosterone and oestrogen) smoking and drug abuse on the foetus [Relate this to
 the role of the placenta]
 • testosterone (from the testes) and oestrogen (from the
 ovaries) cause secondary sexual characteristics such as
 menstruation, breast development, pubic hair, facial hair,
 • debating and discussing issues such as abortion,
 deepening of the male voice
 infertility, surrogacy, contraception, population control
 Reproductive organs
 • the male reproductive organs include the penis, sperm duct
 (vas deferens), testes (produces sperm cells), scrotum,
 urethra
 • the female reproductive organs include the vagina, uterus,
 ovaries (contain egg cells/ ova), oviducts (Fallopian tubes)

 59
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 60
 Human Stages of reproduction
 Reproduction
 • once a month, one of the ovaries releases a ripe egg in a
 [continued…] process called ovulation
 • in preparation for a fertilised egg, the uterus develops a thick layer
 of blood
 • if fertilisation does not take place, menstruation occurs
 • menstruation is the breakdown of the thick layer of blood in
 the uterus, which is released through the vagina
 • the menstrual cycle is usually a 28 day cycle
 • during copulation, the erect penis is inserted into the vagina
 and semen is released (ejaculation)
 • fertilisation is the fusion of the sperm and egg, producing a
 zygote
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • if fertilisation takes place, the fertilised egg is implanted in the
 blood layer in the uterus, and pregnancy results
 • the developing embryo/foetus is attached to the uterus wall by
 the placenta which plays a vital role in feeding and removing
 waste from the foetus
 • the stage of pregnancy in humans (gestation) is about 40
 weeks
 • pregnancy can be prevented by using contraceptives such as
 condoms to prevent the sperm reaching the egg
 • condoms also prevent the transmission of HIV/AIDS and other
 STDs (sexually transmitted diseases), if used effectively

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1 ½ weeks Circulatory Breathing, gaseous exchange, circulation and respiration • measuring and comparing heart rates before and • Sheep/pig

CAPS
 and after exercise
 • oxygen is inhaled in a process called breathing • heart and lungs
 respiratory
 -- collect information/data on at least 10 learners
 systems • in the lungs gases are exchanged (gaseous exchange) • Stop watch/cell
 between the alveoli and the surrounding capillaries by the -- identify the variables phone (for timing)
 process of diffusion
 -- draw a bar graph of the results
 • oxygenated blood is transported (circulation) from the lungs
 -- make deductions about the fitness of the learners
 to the left side of the heart where it is pumped under high
 based on heart rate
 pressure to the body through the arteries [arteries transport
 oxygenated blood, except for the pulmonary arteries] -- writing about the benefits of exercise for the cardio
 vascular system
 • arteries subdivide to form capillaries which are in close contact
 with the body cells. Here, gaseous exchange occurs and • drawing up a table of differences between arteries,
 oxygen moves into the cells by the process of diffusion veins and capillaries
 • in the mitochondria of the cells, oxygen is combined with food • labelling diagrams of the respiratory system
 in the process of respiration and energy is released for other
 • dissecting a pig or sheep heart and lungs [obtained
 body processes
 from butchery] to examine the structure
 • carbon dioxide (by-product of respiration), diffuses from the
 • drawing flow charts to show the sequence of the
 cells into the capillaries for excretion, and is transported
 stages from inhaling oxygen, to respiration, to exhaling
 (circulation) in the blood to the right side of the heart by veins
 carbon dioxide
 [veins transport deoxygenated blood, except for the pulmonary
 veins] • researching and writing about one of the causes of
 health issues (such as smoking, drinking alcohol, high
 • the heart pumps the deoxygenated blood (contains carbon
 cholesterol levels) associated with the circulatory and
 dioxide), to the lungs where it is, where it diffuses into the air
 respiratory systems
 that is exhaled out of the body
 1 ½ weeks Digestive Healthy diet • conducting an investigation to test for the presence • Pictures of eating
 system of starch and grease (fats and oils) in food. Write disorders
 • a healthy diet (eating plan) requires different components
 an experimental report using the headings; aim,
 including proteins, carbohydrates, fats and oils, vitamins and • Video clips
 hypothesis, method, results, conclusion and
 minerals, fibre and water
 discussion [Add a few drops of iodine solution to test • Samples of food
 • disorders of the digestive system can be related to for starch, crush food, mix with alcohol / ethanol, stain
 • Iodine solution
 inappropriate eating plans a white paper with mixture]
 • White paper
 • Ethanol or pure
 alcohol

 61
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 62
 Digestive The alimentary canal and digestion • conducting a starch test and grease test on a variety
 system of foods such as potatoes, raw pasta, cheese
 • the alimentary canal is composed of the mouth, oesophagus,
 [continued…] stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum and anus
 • digestion is the breakdown of food into a usable dissolved • discussing a variety of unhealthy dietary components
 form There are two types of digestion: such as additives, and the harmful effects of some
 diets such as eating too much fast food and diets
 -- mechanical digestion involves the physical breaking, crushing
 developed for weight loss
 and mashing of food
 -- chemical digestion involves the mixing food with digestive
 enzymes and hydrochloric acid [no detail of the enzymes • comparing balanced diets from different cultures such
 required] as kosher / halaal and non-kosher / non-halaal food
 • the structure of each part of the alimentary canal is adapted to
 its function [no detail required]
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • identify, describe and give the function of the basic components of plant and
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly animal cells
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the • draw and label a generalised plant and animal cell
 learner’s notebook
 • explain the relationship between cells, tissues, organs and systems
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly. • list the systems [dealt with], and give the purpose and main components of
 each
 Allow for a maximum of 6 hours to be used for assessment throughout the term.
 • describe and give the function of the male and female reproductive organs
 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4
 • explain the main processes in reproduction, such as menstruation, fertilization
 • explain the impact of factors on the foetus during pregnancy, such as smoking,
 alcohol

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • describe breathing, gaseous exchange and respiration
 • label the reproductive, respiratory and digestive systems
 GRADE 9 TERM 2
 STRAND: MATTER AND MATERIALS
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND

CAPS
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1 week Compounds Briefly review and revise concepts dealt with in Grade 8, • Textbooks
 focusing on compounds and reference
 materials
 The Periodic Table
 [Note: use the Periodic Table of Elements as a reference tool in
 the topics that follow]
 • the elements can be classified into metals, non-metals and
 semi metals
 • the elements found in groups (vertical columns) have similar
 chemical properties
 • each element on the Periodic Table (in its own block) has • memorising the name and the symbol of each of the • Periodic Table of
 an atomic number (smaller number), mass number (larger first 20 elements, on the Periodic Table, as well as Elements
 number), name and symbol iron (Fe), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn) [learners need not
 memorise the atomic number of each element]
 • a formula/e is ratio of the symbols of the elements and number
 of atoms for each symbol in a compound

 Names of compounds • naming, writing symbols, and drawing pictures • beads/ beans/
 plasticine or
 • many compounds are named according to their elements, or
 playdough
 such as sodium chloride (table salt) which is made of the
 making models (using beads, beans or plasticine
 elements sodium and chlorine. But others have common
 or playdough) of several elements and compounds.
 names such as water and ammonia
 Including: water (H2O), oxygen (O2), carbon monoxide
 • some compounds have names such as carbon monoxide CO, (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2), copper oxide (CuO), sodium
 carbon dioxide CO2, sulfur trioxide SO3. In these compounds: chloride (NaCl), sulfur trioxide (SO3)
 -- monoxide- tells us that one oxygen atom has combined with [Note: the latest internationally accepted spelling is now
 the carbon atom sulfur not sulphur]
 -- dioxide- tells us that two oxygen atoms have combined with
 the carbon atom
 -- trioxide- tells us that three oxygen atoms have combined
 with the sulfur atom

 63
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 64
 1 weeks Chemical Chemical equations to represent reactions • naming, writing symbols, and drawing pictures or • Plastic beads/
 reactions making models (using beads, beans or plasticine or beans/ plasticine
 • chemical reactions can be represented with models
 playdough) of the chemical reactions: or playdough
 • chemical reactions are usually represented with symbols such
 -- C+O2 CO2
 as in chemical equations: For example:
 -- 2H2+O2 2H2O
 -- C+O2 CO2
 [make models of the reactants and rearrange the atoms
 -- 2H2+O2 2H2O
 to show how the products are formed]
 • the subscript number indicates the number of atoms of an
 element found in the formula
 • the numbers in front of the compounds indicate the ratio in
 which the molecules react. For example two molecules of
 hydrogen react with one molecule of oxygen to form water,
 therefore the ratio is 2:1 (H:O)
 • no atoms are lost or gained in the reaction, they are simply
 rearranged
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 Balanced equations
 • chemical equations must be written as balanced chemical
 equations. The total number and type of atoms of the
 reactants is the same as in the products. The above equations
 are therefore balanced in the following way:
 -- 4Fe + 3O2 2Fe2O3 (brown rusty coating)
 -- 2Mg+ O2 2MgO (white powder)
 • another example is copper reacting with oxygen to form
 copper oxide. This is a very slow reaction
 -- word equation: copper + oxygen copper oxide

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 chemical equation: 2Cu + O2 2CuO
 [Learners are not required to write the formulae/symbols for
 other word equations]
 Note: Grade 9 learners must write the names and the formulae (chemical symbols) of ALL the substances for every reaction that follows.
 They must also identify the relevant elements, mentioned in the reactions, on the Periodic Table of Elements
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 1 ½ weeks Reactions of The general reaction of metals with oxygen • Heat source (such

CAPS
 metals with as Bunsen burner
 oxygen • some metals react with oxygen during burning (combustion)
 or spirit lamp)
 • when a metal reacts with oxygen, a metal oxide is formed as
 • matches
 a product. The general equation for this type of reaction is
 always: • Safety goggles
 metal + oxygen metal oxide • Steel wool
 Reaction of iron with oxygen • Tongs/ pliers
 • when the metal iron is burnt in air (which contains oxygen), the • burning a small amount of steel wool [use a pair of
 • Heat source (such
 reaction forms iron oxide as a product tongs to hold the steel wool in the flame of a Bunsen/
 as Bunsen burner
 spirit burner until it ignites]
 or spirit lamp)
 -- word equation: iron + oxygen iron oxide
 [Safety note: Teacher demonstration only. Steel wool
 • matches
 -- chemical equation: Fe + O2 Fe2O3 [unbalanced] gets very hot when it burns, and can produce sparks. Be
 careful not to start a fire or burn yourself] • Safety goggles
 Reaction of magnesium with oxygen
 • burning a small amount of magnesium ribbon [use • magnesium ribbon
 • when the metal magnesium is burnt in air (which contains
 a pair of tongs to hold the magnesium ribbon in the
 oxygen), the reaction forms magnesium oxide as a product • Tongs/ pliers
 flame of a Bunsen/spirit burner until it ignites].
 -- word equation: magnesium + oxygen magnesium oxide
 [Special note: Keep the white oxide produced from this
 -- chemical equation: Mg + O2 MgO [unbalanced] reaction to use later in “reactions of acids with metal
 oxides”]
 [Safety note: Teacher demonstration only.
 Magnesium ribbon produces a very bright light which
 can permanently damage eyes if looked at directly. Ask
 learners to look to the side and just be aware of the
 bright light rather than looking at it directly. Be careful not
 to start a fire or burn yourself]

 65
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 66
 Reactions of Formation of rust • Pictures of rusty
 metals with objects
 oxygen • rusting is a slow chemical reaction of iron metal, with oxygen
 and moisture (water) to form a complex compound part of
 [continued…] which is iron oxide.
 • rust (a form of corrosion) only occurs at the surface of the iron
 exposed to the air
 • steel (which consists mostly of iron) is an essential material in
 modern construction. Equipment and structures can rust, and
 weaken
 Ways to prevent rusting
 • iron and steel can be painted to keep away moisture and
 oxygen
 • iron and steel can be coated with a thin layer of chromium
 or zinc (metals which do not rust) This is done by an
 electroplating technique which is a form of electrolysis
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 1 week Reactions of The general reaction of non-metals with oxygen
 non-metals
 • non-metals react with oxygen to form non-metal oxides
 with oxygen
 • when any non-metal is burnt in excess oxygen, the general
 equation is always:
 non-metal + oxygen non-metal oxide
 Reaction of carbon with oxygen
 • when the non-metal carbon is burnt in oxygen, carbon dioxide
 is produced
 -- word equation: carbon + oxygen carbon dioxide

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 -- chemical equation: C + O2 CO2 (this equation is already
 balanced)
 Reaction of sulfur with oxygen • naming, writing symbols, and drawing pictures or -- Plastic beads/
 making models (using beads, beans or plasticine or beans/ plasticine
 • another example is sulfur reacting with oxygen to form sulfur
 playdough) of the chemical reaction: or playdough
 dioxide
 -- S + O2 SO2
 -- word equation: sulfur + oxygen sulfur dioxide
 [Make models of the reactants and rearrange the atoms
 -- chemical equation: S + O2 SO2 (this equation is already
 to show how the products are formed]
 balanced)
 [Note: It is not required to demonstrate the above
 reaction, as the product sulfur dioxide is dangerous for
 asthmatics. This reaction cannot be done safely in most
 classrooms]
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1 week Acids & The concept of pH value • investigating a selection of household substances • Universal indicator

CAPS
 bases, and (such as water, tea and rooibos, coffee, milk, fruit
 • pH is a measure of how acidic or basic a substance is. The pH • Red cabbage/ red
 pH value juices, vinegar, tartaric acid, washing powder,
 scale ranges from 1 to 14 onion/ turmeric/
 bicarbonate of soda, salt water) to test whether they
 bromothymol blue
 • acids have a pH in the range of 1 to 7. Strong acids have very are acids, bases or neutrals using universal indicator
 or phenolphthalein
 low pH values and at least one other indicator (such as red cabbage
 water, red onion water, turmeric water, bromothymol • Test tubes
 • bases have a pH in the range of 7 to 14. Strong bases have
 blue, phenolphthalein). Record results (colour change)
 very high pH values • Test tube racks
 on a table and draw conclusions (acid, base or neutral)
 • a neutral substance has a pH of 7 • Glass containers
 • sequencing the above substances according to the
 • we use chemical indicators (such as universal indicator, litmus colour change of the universal indicator, from the most • Liquids such
 paper, red cabbage water, red onion water, turmeric water, acidic (darkest red) to the most basic (purple) as: tea, rooibos,
 bromothymol blue, phenolphthalein) to tell us whether a coffee, milk, fruit
 [Note: see Appendix 1 (at the end of this term) for colour
 substance is an acid, base or neutral juices, fizzy drinks
 changes of these indicators]
 • universal indicator has the ability to indicate the full range of • Household
 pH values on the pH scale by colour changes substances such
 as: vinegar, tartaric
 -- acids change the colour of universal indicator towards the
 acid, lemon, soap,
 yellow, orange and red colours
 bicarbonate of
 -- bases change the colour of universal indicator towards the soda, liquid soap
 blue and purple colours
 -- neutral substances (pH 7), change the colour of universal
 indicator to green
 ½ week Reactions of Neutralisation and pH • investigating neutralisation by reacting vinegar • Beakers/ glass jars
 acids with (acid) with bicarbonate of soda (base) [Use universal
 • acids and bases react together, we call this a neutralisation • Test tubes
 bases: Part I indicator to find the approximate point at which the
 reaction
 acid completely neutralises the base (Hint: universal • Vinegar
 • a base reacts with an acid, to make it less acidic / neutral indicator must turn green)]
 • Bicarbonate of
 • an acid reacts with a base, to make it less basic / neutral soda
 • acids commonly used in the laboratory include sulphuric acid • Water
 (H2SO4) and hydrochloric acid (HCl)
 • Universal indicator
 • after reacting an acid and a base together, the resultant pH
 will vary based on the strength of the acid and base reactants
 • non-metal oxides tend to be acidic (low pH)
 • bases (high pH) include metal oxides, metal hydroxides, metal
 carbonates

 67
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 68
 1 week Reactions of The general reaction of an acid with a metal oxide (base) • investigating whether the magnesium oxide (MgO) • Magnesium oxide
 acids with [kept product from burning magnesium] is an acid powder
 • when metals react with oxygen, they tend to form oxides which
 bases: Part II or a base when dissolved in water. Test the pH
 are bases (see reactions of metals with oxygen) • Water
 using universal indicator. Record the pH, and draw
 • when any acid reacts with a metal oxide, the products formed conclusions • Universal indicator
 are a salt and water. The type of salt formed will depend on
 • Test tubes
 the specific acid and metal oxide used in that reaction
 • Test tube racks
 • the general equation is always:
 • Glass containers
 acid + metal oxide salt + water
 • Pictures illustrating
 • Example:
 the effects of acid
 -- word equation: hydrochloric acid + magnesium oxide rain
 magnesium chloride + water
 • Dilute sodium
 -- balanced chemical equation: 2HCl + MgO MgCl2 + H2O hydroxide
 Applications • reading about the causes and consequences of acid • Dilute hydrochloric
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 rain and including possible ways to reduce acid rain acid
 • burning wood and fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide and
 sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere. These combine with water [Safety note: For the following activities - LEARNERS • Water
 in the atmosphere to produce acid rain SHOULD NOT TRY TO DILUTE HYDROCHLORIC ACID
 • Universal indicator
 THEMSELVES as acids react strongly with water. An acid
 • limestone (CaCO3) is used in agriculture to make soil less
 must be slowly added to water and not water to an acid to • Beakers/ glass jars
 acidic
 dilute it.]
 • Test tubes
 The general reaction of an acid with a metal hydroxide
 • investigating neutralisation of metal hydroxides by
 (base) • Universal indicator
 reacting dilute sodium hydroxide (NaOH) with dilute
 • when metals react with water, they tend to form hydroxides hydrochloric acid (HCl) [Use universal indicator to find • Heat source (such
 which are bases the approximate point at which the acid completely as Bunsen or spirit
 neutralises the base. (Hint: universal indicator must burner)
 • when any acid reacts with a metal hydroxide, the products
 turn green) Use a dropper to add the acid as the
 formed are a salt and water. The type of salt formed will • Evaporating tins
 solution begins to turn the universal indicator yellow to

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 depend on the specific acid and metal oxide used in that
 red] • Dropper
 reaction
 • the general equation is always:
 • recovering the table salt (sodium chloride) from the
 acid + metal hydroxide salt + water
 above neutralisation by crystallising it (evaporating the
 • Example: solvent) [Note: only do this once you have confirmed
 that the sodium hydroxide has been completely
 -- word equation: hydrochloric acid + sodium hydroxide neutralised (universal indicator turns green)]
 sodium chloride + water
 -- balanced chemical equation: HCl + NaOH NaCl + H2O
 [Note: sodium chloride (NaCl) is table salt]
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 ½ week Reactions of The general reaction of an acid with a metal carbonate • investigating neutralisation of metal carbonates by • Chalk dust

CAPS
 acids with (base) reacting chalk dust (calcium carbonate) with dilute
 • Dilute hydrochloric
 bases: Part III hydrochloric acid (HCl) [Use universal indicator to find
 • metal carbonates are bases acid
 the approximate point at which the acid completely
 • when any acid reacts with a metal carbonate, the products neutralises the base (Hint: universal indicator must • Water
 formed are a salt, carbon dioxide and water. The type of salt turn green)]. Collect the carbon dioxide as the reaction
 • Universal indicator
 formed will depend on the specific acid and metal carbonate proceeds. Test for the presence of carbon dioxide
 used in that reaction • Beakers/ glass jars
 • the general equation is always: • Test tubes
 acid + metal carbonate salt + carbon dioxide + water
 • Example: [Note: lime water - Ca(OH)2, is used to test for carbon • Lime water
 dioxide (CO2) gas. When CO2 is bubbled through clear
 -- word equation: hydrochloric acid + calcium carbonate lime water, it turns white]
 calcium chloride + carbon dioxide + water
 -- balanced chemical equation: 2HCl + CaCO3 CaCl2 +
 CO2 + H2O
 ½ week Reactions of The general reaction of an acid with a metal investigating reactions of acids with metals by reacting • Magnesium
 acids with dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl) with magnesium. Test for
 • when any acid reacts with a metal, the products formed are a • Dilute hydrochloric
 metals H2 gas
 salt and hydrogen gas. The type of salt formed will depend on acid
 the specific acid and metal used in that reaction
 • Water
 • the general equation is always: [Note: a glowing splint is used to test for the presence of
 • Beakers/ glass jars
 hydrogen gas. It produces a popping sound]
 acid + metal salt + hydrogen gas
 • Test tubes
 • writing a summary of the following general chemical
 • Example:
 reactions, using words. Also give an example of each • Wooden splint
 -- word equation: hydrochloric acid + magnesium written as a balanced chemical equation:
 magnesium chloride + hydrogen gas
 -- metals and non-metals with oxygen
 -- balanced chemical equation: 2HCl + Mg MgCl2 + H2
 -- acids with bases (neutralisation)
 -- acids with metal oxides
 -- acids with metal hydroxides
 -- acids with metal carbonates
 • reading about careers in the chemical industry,
 including agriculture, pharmacy, chemical engineering,
 mining [not for assessment purposes]

 69
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 70
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • distinguish between pure substances and mixtures
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly
 • distinguish between elements and compounds
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the learner’s
 • name and make models of simple molecules
 notebook
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for • for any of the studied reactions: 1) describe it in general terms; 2) describe the
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly. changes that occur during the reaction; 3) write a balanced equation

 As this is an exam term, the final two weeks may be required for revision. • describe the neutralisation of an acid with a base using pH

 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4.
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 Appendix:

 Table: Colour changes of selected indicators used in the Senior Phase

 INDICATOR COLOUR IN ACID (pH 1 – 6) COLOUR IN NEUTRAL (pH 7) COLOUR IN BASE (pH 8 -14)
 Universal indicator Red, orange, yellow Green Blue, violet, purple
 Red cabbage water Red, pink Violet, purple Blue, green, yellow
 Red onion water Red Violet Green
 Tumeric water Yellow Yellow Red

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Phenolphthalein colourless colourless Pink, red
 Bromothymol blue Yellow Green Blue
 Red litmus paper Red Red Blue
 Blue litmus paper Red Blue Blue
 GRADE 9 TERM 3
 STRAND: ENERGY AND CHANGE
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND

CAPS
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 2 weeks Forces Types of forces • Textbooks and
 • a force is a push or pull (or twist) exerted upon an object reference materials
 • force is measured in units called newtons (N)
 • forces that two objects exert on each other always act in pairs • Investigating physical (mechanical) push and pull • Wooden blocks
 • a force can change the shape, direction and speed of an forces on objects and materials, such as wooden • Sponges
 object blocks, sponges, erasers, fabric, balls and balloons.
 • Rubber (eraser)
 Observe what happens when one person pulls
 • all forces acting on objects can be placed into two broad • Fabric
 another, when both people pull, when one person
 groups:
 pushes, when two people push • Balls/balloons
 -- contact forces
 -- field forces
 Contact forces
 • a contact force (including friction, tension, compression)
 results when two bodies are in contact (touch) with each other
 Field forces (non-contact forces)
 • field forces result from action-at-a-distance between two
 bodies
 • common examples of field forces include gravitational,
 magnetic and electrostatic forces
 -- Gravitational force: gravity is the force of attraction (pull) • demonstrating gravitational force using falling
 that objects/bodies have on one another due to their masses. objects: direction is always “downwards” towards the
 For example the attraction of Sun and planets, Earth and centre of the Earth. The object (small mass) and the
 Moon, Earth and objects on the surface (people and things) Earth (large mass) attract one another
 o objects with greater mass have more gravitational pull on
 each other
 o force decreases as distance between the objects
 increases (refer to Grade 7 Planet Earth & Beyond)
 o force of gravity is measured in newtons (N) • measuring and recording the weights (in newtons) • Spring balances
 o the weight of an object is the gravitational force exerted of different objects using a spring balance and force calibrated in
 on it by the Earth (or the Moon, or another planet). It is meter newtons,
 also measured in newtons (N)
 ◊ the mass of the object stays the same no matter where
 it is determined

 71
 ◊ however, the weight of an object will change when
 weighed in different places with different gravitational
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 force such as on Earth compared to the Moon
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 72
 Forces Field forces (non-contact forces) [continued...] • Investigating which substances (non-metals and • Bar magnets
 metals) are attracted by a bar magnet, using materials
 [continued...] • Magnetic force: magnets attract magnetic substances • Iron fillings
 such as paper, wood, plastic, iron, brass, aluminium.
 including iron, steel, cobalt, nickel
 Record the observations in table form. • Paper
 -- all magnets have two ends/poles (north & south)
 • Investigating whether a magnetic force can act on • Wood
 o opposite poles attract and like poles repel each other a magnetic substance when it is separated from the
 • Plastic
 (magnetism is the push or pull force) magnet by different materials such as wood, paper,
 foil, a hand and steel • Iron
 o just like a bar magnet, the Earth has a magnetic field
 (north and south poles) • Brass
 • observing the pattern made by a magnet on iron • Aluminium foil
 filings [sprinkle iron filings on a piece of paper, and
 place a magnet under the paper]

 • investigating repulsion and attraction forces of two
 bar magnets when:
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 -- opposite poles are close to each other (pull force)
 -- like poles are close to each other (push force)
 • Electrostatic force: When certain materials are rubbed • investigating how to charge objects by rubbing • Perspex
 together, they can acquire an electrostatic charge as a result different materials/objects together using available
 • Plastic ruler/comb
 of the loss or gain of electrons [Note: only the electrons are materials and objects including different fabrics,
 transferred, protons cannot move] inflated balloons, plastic combs, perspex, glass, plastic • Plastic bags
 bags and pieces of paper. Observe the electrostatic
 -- during rubbing, the electrons move from one material causing • Silk cloth and other
 forces of attraction and repulsion between the objects
 a positive charge on its surface, and causing a negative fabrics
 [Note: This activity does not work well in rainy weather
 charge on the surface of the other material
 or humid conditions as water droplets in the air allow • Inflated balloons
 -- objects which have like charge (+ and + or - and -) repel electric charge to “leak” away from charged objects]
 • Glass

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 (push) each other and those with unlike charge (+ and -)
 attract (pull) each other (refer to Gr 8 Energy & Change) • Pieces of paper
 -- charged objects in an electrostatic system possess potential
 energy. The energy comes from the work done during rubbing
 -- a thunder cloud becomes charged by the rubbing together • writing about safety precautions during thunder and
 of air and water particles moving past each other in the lightning storms
 atmosphere
 o a lightning strike occurs when there is a massive
 discharge (release of charge) between the thunder cloud
 and the ground. Lightning is a giant spark of electricity
 o safety precautions should be considered during thunder
 and lightning storms
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 ½ week Electric cells Electric cells • making a cell by placing zinc and copper plates, as • Conducting wires

CAPS
 as energy • a cell is a system in which certain chemical reactions can electrodes • LED bulbs
 systems cause the flow of electricity through an external circuit -- in a solution of laboratory chemicals (such as zinc • Zinc and copper
 • cells are a source of electricity sulphate and copper sulphate) [use a cloth soaked in plates, zinc
 either of the solutions as a salt bridge] sulphate, copper
 • a battery is a group of cells that are connected together
 OR sulphate,
 -- in an acidic fruit (such as a lemon)
 [Note: Connect several cells in series until a LED (Light
 Emitting Diode) is able to light up or connect a sensitive
 multimeter/voltmeter to the electrodes to show the
 voltage]
 1 week Resistance Uses of resistors
 • conductors (even good conductors) heat up when current
 passes through them: some energy is ‘lost’/’wasted’ as heat.
 All conductors have some resistance
 • a resistor is a conducting material selected to control the
 current or to provide useful energy transfer, such as in bulbs,
 rheostats, motors, light sensitive diodes, light emitting diodes
 Factors that affect resistance in a circuit • investigating at least one of the factors (type of • Circuit board
 • type of material: different conducting materials have different material, thickness or length of the conductor) that • Cells/battery
 resistance to an electric current affect resistance of a conductor in a circuit [make a
 circuit containing a cell, light bulb and an ammeter in • Different conductors
 • thickness of the conductor: thinner wires have more resistance series, then insert the different conductors, one at a (wires)
 than thicker wires time]. Record ammeter readings on a table and draw • Light bulbs or LEDs
 • length of the conductor: longer wires have more resistance conclusions • Ammeter
 than shorter wires [Note: It is not required to do an activity on the effect of
 • temperature of the conductor: generally hotter conductors temperature at this level]
 (metals) have higher resistance than colder conductors
 2 weeks Series and Series circuits • investigating the effects of connecting more cells in • Circuit board
 parallel • when cells are connected together in series, the total voltage series into the circuit [observe the brightness of the • Cells/battery
 circuits is the sum of the voltages (potential differences) of individual light bulbs as more cells are added]
 • Conductor (wire)
 cells • measuring voltages across each resistor in series,
 and across the battery [show that the sum of the • Resistors
 • resistors can be connected in series in a circuit
 voltages across the resistors adds up to the voltage • Light bulbs or
 • the total voltage across the battery is the same as the sum of across the battery]. Record measurements on the
 the voltages across each of the resistors • LEDs
 circuit diagram
 -- a resistor with higher resistance will have higher voltage • Voltmeter

 73
 across it • Ammeter
 -- a resistor with lower resistance will have a lower voltage
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 across it
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 74
 Series and Series circuits [continued...] [Note: In order to measure voltage, a voltmeter must
 parallel always be connected across (in parallel) a resistor or
 circuits • the current is the same when measured at any point in a given
 battery. However, to measure current, an ammeter
 series circuit
 [continued...] needs to be connected in line (in series) with the resistor
 • the total current decreases with each resistor added in series or battery]
 to the circuit

 • measuring the current at different points in a series
 circuit [show that the current is the same when
 measured at any point in a given series circuit].
 Record measurements on a circuit diagram
 Parallel circuits • investigating the effects of connecting more cells in
 parallel into the circuit [observe the brightness of the
 • when cells (of same voltage) are connected in parallel, the
 light bulbs as more cells are added]
 voltage across them is the same as for one cell.
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • resistors can be connected in parallel in a circuit • measuring voltages across each resistor in parallel,
 and across the battery [show that the voltage is the
 • the voltage is the same across each resistor connected in
 same across each resistor connected in parallel].
 parallel
 Record measurements on the circuit diagram
 • The total current through the battery is the same as the sum of
 the currents through the resistors
 • measuring the total current through each of the
 • the total current in the circuit increases with each resistor
 resistors, and from the battery [show that the sum of
 added in parallel
 the currents through the resistors adds up to the total
 current in the circuit]. Record measurements on the
 circuit diagram

 • the lighting system in our homes is usually connected in • identifying series and parallel circuits in electrical

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 parallel. If one light bulb fuses (filament breaks), the rest of wiring in homes, cars and toys
 the lights remain on because they are each connected in their
 • drawing series and parallel circuit diagrams
 own parallel pathway, to the mains circuit
 • resistors are manufactured to have accurate resistances to
 control current
 • for two circuits with the same total voltage:
 -- the current will be bigger in a circuit with low resistance
 -- the current will be smaller in a circuit with high resistance
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 ½ week Safety with Safety practices • identifying fuses, circuit breakers, earthing and earth • Pictures or

CAPS
 electricity leakage systems in real circuits, or on circuit diagrams diagrams of wiring
 • parallel connections can cause overload on mains circuits
 showing fuses,
 • practising how to connect 3-pin plugs
 • circuit breakers, fuses and earth leakage systems are used as circuit breakers
 safety devices • drawing the plan for wiring a house: and earthing
 • many appliances have a 3-pin plug as a safety device to -- each room should have its own light with a switch • Three-pin plugs
 connect to the main circuit
 -- the house should have a main switch and a fuse (to • Screwdrivers
 • the 3-pin plug has a live wire, neutral wire and an earth wire prevent overload)
 -- the earth wire is connected to the metal case of the [Note: It is not necessary to construct a model house]
 appliance, such as in a kettle. The earth wire is connected
 via the wall plug to an earth cable in the ground
 -- the earth cable has almost zero resistance, so if the metal
 casing of an appliance becomes charged due to a fault, the
 charge is safely discharged to the ground
 • illegal connections to the ESKOM mains supply can be
 dangerous, and are regarded as energy theft
 1 week Energy and Electricity generation • Pictures of
 the national power stations in
 • a power station is a system for generating electricity
 electricity southern Africa
 grid • most power stations in South Africa use coal as a fuel to boil
 • Pictures of
 water
 components of a
 • the steam from the water turns a turbine which turns a power station
 generator, which produces electricity
 • Video clips from
 • there are other alternative sources of energy besides coal, • researching about alternative sources of energy the internet
 that can be used to drive turbines and generators including that can be used to drive generators for the national
 wind, falling water (hydroelectric), sun-heated steam, nuclear grid. Compare them in terms of sustainability and
 fission, waves in the sea environmental impact

 Nuclear power in South Africa
 • a nuclear power station such as Koeberg in the Cape, uses
 radioactive fuel, the radioactivity produces heat by nuclear
 fission. The heat is then used to boil water to produce steam
 • the steam from the water turns a turbine which turns a
 generator, that produces electricity. The electricity is then
 channelled into the national electricity grid

 75
 • spent nuclear fuel (nuclear waste) is still radioactive and
 remains so for many hundreds of years, therefore it needs to
 be properly disposed of so it is not a danger to life for years to
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 come
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 76
 Energy and National electricity grid • Diagram showing
 the national • the national grid is a network of interacting parts (a system): the national
 electricity change in one part of the grid affects other parts of the grid electricity grid
 grid with main power
 -- power stations feed electrical energy into the national grid at stations
 [continued...] high voltages
 -- power lines carry electricity at high voltages
 -- transformers step down the voltage for local distributors
 and consumers: 15% of energy is wasted due to heating of
 transmission lines and transformers [No details are required
 of alternating current or step-down transformers]
 • power surges and grid overload can disrupt the power supply
 2 weeks Cost of The cost of power consumption • examining labels (in adverts, or real electrical • Examples
 electrical • electrical power is the rate of electrical energy supply appliances such as iron, stove, TV, radio, refrigerator), of electricity
 power and accounts that
 • electrical power is measured in units called watts (W) or show electricity
 -- record in a table the power rating printed on the
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 kilowatts (kW) [one watt of power is equal to one joule of usage and cost
 energy supplied in a second (I watt = 1 joule per second)] devices

 • consumers pay for the quantity of power they use -- calculate and record the units of power consumed
 by these different appliances in a given time
 -- quantity of electrical power used is measured in kWh (kilowatt period (kWh) [different learners can calculate the
 hours) consumption of different appliances]
 -- the cost to the consumer is calculated in the following way: -- sequence the appliances from those which require
 cost = power rating of the appliance × the number of hours it the most power to those which require the least
 was used × the unit price of electricity power
 • the energy consumption of different appliances (such as • calculating how much money it will cost the consumer
 incandescent and compact fluorescent lamps) varies to run one of the appliances above for a given period
 • there are also alternative appliances/systems such as solar [show how to calculate the cost by multiplying the kWh
 heating panels for heating water by the unit cost of electricity

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 (Note: The unit cost of electricity increases from time to
 time. Find out what the current unit cost of electricity is in
 your municipality for this calculation)
 OR
 • selecting one appliance from the above appliances.
 Calculate how long a particular prepaid card will last if
 only that appliance is used
 • discussing the many careers in the energy sector,
 including electricians, electrical engineers, artisans,
 IT specialists for maintaining and improving the power
 grid
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the Learner’s knowledge and that they can:

CAPS
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • explain and demonstrate the two broad groups of forces
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly
 • demonstrate and explain the similarities and differences between gravitational,
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the magnetic and electrostatic forces
 learner’s notebook
 • make a table of the differences between mass and weight
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly. • give the scientific explanation of how lightning occurs

 Allow for a maximum of 6 hours to be used for assessment throughout the term. • construct a simple cell to provide electrical energy from chemical energy

 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4. • measure voltages across resistors and the current through them accurately
 • give advantages and disadvantages for series and parallel circuits
 • draw and interpret various circuit diagrams
 • distinguish between series and parallel circuits in the wiring of the home, cars
 and toys and explain the differences
 • describe the national energy supply grid and the impact of electricity
 generation on the environment
 • calculate the energy consumption of various appliances in the home

 77
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 GRADE 9 TERM 4
 STRAND: PLANET EARTH AND BEYOND

 78
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1 week The Earth as Spheres of the Earth • drawing and labelling the concentric layers of the • Textbooks and
 a system inside of the Earth [revision from Social Sciences reference materials
 • the Earth can be understood as a complex system where all
 Grade 7)
 the parts (called spheres) interact with each other • Models or pictures
 • writing to explain the interaction between the spheres of the Earth (globe)
 • four spheres interact on or near the surface of the Earth:
 (lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, biosphere)
 -- the lithosphere consists of solid rock and soil
 -- the hydrosphere consists of water in all its forms
 -- the atmosphere is a layer of gases around the Earth
 -- the biosphere consists of all living plants and animals and
 their interactions with rocks, soil, air and water
 2 weeks Lithosphere Lithosphere • researching and reading about what elements and • Samples of
 compounds we get from the crust different rocks
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • the Earth consists of four concentric layers called the inner
 (if available) or
 core, outer core, mantle and crust (link to Grade 7 Social
 pictures of different
 Sciences)
 rocks
 • the lithosphere (‘lith’ means ‘rocks’) has three layers: the solid
 • Pictures that show
 outermost part of the mantle, the crust and the soil
 the rock cycle
 • different combinations of elements and compounds form
 minerals such as copper, gold and hematite (iron oxide) in the
 crust
 The rock cycle • modeling the formation of rock layers
 • the rock cycle is the natural continuous process in which [use brown and white slices of bread for alternate
 rocks form, are broken down and re-form over long periods of layers]

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 time
 • writing, and making labeled drawings to explain the
 • there are three rock types: igneous, sedimentary and rock cycle
 metamorphic rocks
 • collecting and identifying different types of rocks
 • the rock cycle can be explained in the following steps: from samples or pictures
 -- molten rock from the mantle (magma) pushes up through
 the crust
 -- pools of magma cool down slowly in the crust to form igneous
 rocks, like granite
 -- some magma escapes to the surface as a volcano
 -- this magma cools down rapidly to form igneous rocks, like
 pumice stone
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Lithosphere -- rocks on the surface of the Earth are weathered by heat,

CAPS
 cold, wind and water to form smaller particles
 [continued…]
 -- wind and water transport these particles to flood plains and
 the sea by erosion
 -- the particles are laid down as sediments
 -- the sediments are covered by more layers
 The rock cycle – explained in steps
 • the pressure of many layers turns the lower layers into
 sedimentary rock like sandstone
 • hot magma heats the surrounding rock and changes its
 chemical structure to form metamorphic rock like slate from
 shale or marble from limestone
 • some rock is pushed below the crust, melts and becomes
 magma again

 79
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 80
 2 weeks Mining of Extracting ores • reading about how metal is extracted from ore • Video clips from the
 mineral internet showing
 • people extract valuable minerals from the lithosphere
 resources metals being
 • rock that contains high concentrations of a valuable mineral is OR extracted from ore
 called an ore
 • Pictures to show
 • the ore is removed from the crust by mining various methods of
 • investigating / demonstrating how lead is extracted
 mining
 • some minerals can be used in their natural form such as from its ore by heating lead oxide on a carbon block
 sand, potash, diamonds • Blow pipes
 • Lead oxide
 OR
 Refining minerals • Carbon blocks
 • some other minerals require a chemical or physical process • Bunsen / spirit
 • illustrating physical separation processes used in
 to extract the required material such as iron from iron-ore burners
 mining [hand sorting or sifting stones from sand]
 (chemical) or gold from gold-ore (physical)
 • knowledge of iron and copper extraction is thousands of
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 years old
 -- iron ore was heated with charcoal to make lumps of iron
 -- South African archaeological sites in KwaZulu Natal and
 Limpopo provide evidence for this
 • modern processes mix coke (a form of carbon made from
 coal) and other metals with iron to produce steel
 Mining in South Africa • researching and writing about a mining activity in
 South Africa. Describe the:
 • there is large scale mining activity in South Africa
 -- elements and compounds being mined
 • this activity has significant environmental impacts such as
 -- chemical and physical separation methods used
 -- creation of mine dumps

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 -- environmental impacts
 -- pollution of water resources
 -- damage to places with high tourist or cultural heritage value
 -- loss of farming and wild life environments
 2 weeks Atmosphere Atmosphere • drawing with labels and writing about the layers of • Video clips from the
 the atmosphere to scale [use a ruler to draw the scale internet
 • the atmosphere is the mixture of gases held around the Earth
 accurately]
 by gravity
 • this mixture is known as air and consists of nitrogen (78%),
 oxygen (21%), carbon dioxide (less than 1%), and other
 gases, including water vapour (1%)
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 Atmosphere Atmosphere [continued…]

CAPS
 [continued…] • the density of the gas particles decreases as the distance
 from the Earth increases (the further away from the Earth, the
 thinner the air)
 • the atmosphere has four layers: troposphere, stratosphere,
 mesosphere, thermosphere
 • each layer has a different temperature gradient
 • temperature gradient is how much the temperature changes
 with height above sea level (altitude)

 Troposphere • calculating the temperature at different heights above
 sea level in the troposphere (the temperature gradient
 • this layer extends from sea level to about 10 km above the
 is about 1oC per 100 metres in still air)
 surface of the Earth
 • it contains more than 70% of the mass of the atmosphere
 (particles closest together) and it has the greatest density
 • the temperature decreases as the distance from the surface
 increases (the further away from the Earth, the colder the air)
 • weather occurs in this layer
 • all animals and plants live in this layer

 Stratosphere
 • this layer extends from about 10 km to about 50 km above the
 Earth’s surface
 • the air in the stratosphere is very thin compared to the air in
 the troposphere
 • some aeroplanes fly as high as the stratosphere
 • the stratosphere includes a band of ozone gas (O3) which
 absorbs ultraviolet radiation from the Sun
 • this absorption of ultraviolet radiation increases the
 temperature of the stratosphere - as a result, the further away
 from the Earth, the warmer the air becomes
 • too much ultraviolet radiation interferes with life on Earth

 81
 (human health, photosynthesis, life cycles and sizes of
 populations of species)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 82
 Atmosphere Mesosphere
 [continued…] • this layer extends from about 50 – 80 km above the Earth’s
 surface
 • the air is extremely thin and very cold
 • there is still enough air in this layer to burn up small rocks and
 dust entering from space
 • burning rocks are visible from the Earth and known as
 ‘shooting stars’
 Thermosphere
 • this layer starts above 80 km from the Earth (the
 thermosphere slowly diminishes at about 350 km and space
 begins after that. Satellites orbit much further away)
 • the International Space Station (ISS), where astronauts work
 in space orbits the Earth at a height of about 370 km
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 • the lowest part of the thermosphere absorbs ultraviolet
 radiation and dangerous X-rays from the Sun
 • it also reflects radio waves back to Earth for TV and radio
 broadcasts
 The greenhouse effect
 • the greenhouse effect is a natural phenomenon – it warms • making a model to show the greenhouse effect [use • Reference
 the atmosphere sufficiently to sustain life clear plastic bags and thermometers] materials
 • greenhouse gases trap the ultraviolet radiation which then • investigating and reporting on the impact of global • Video clips from the
 warms the air closest to the surface of the Earth (like inside a warming internet showing
 greenhouse) the greenhouse
 effect
 • the most common greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide,
 water vapour and methane • Pictures

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • an increase in greenhouse gases leads to global warming • Thermometers
 • global warming is an increase in the average temperature of • Clear plastic bags
 the atmosphere
 • global warming is a potentially life threatening problem on
 Earth. It can lead to:
 -- climate change
 -- rising sea levels
 -- food shortages
 -- mass extinctions
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES
 1 week Birth, life and The birth of a star • Video clips and

CAPS
 death of stars • stars exist for a finite period of time images from the
 internet
 • stars form inside huge clouds of gas and dust called nebulae,
 far out in space
 • these nebulae (huge amounts of dust and gas) are pulled
 together by gravity and slowly collapse
 • as they contract they heat up
 • once the temperature is high enough a nuclear fusion
 reaction begins, that changes hydrogen to helium
 • this reaction radiates large amounts of energy into space
 Life of a star
 • stars change in their appearance over billions of years
 • stars that look blue are hotter and usually younger than stars • observing different coloured stars in the night sky
 that appear red
 • sequencing, explaining and presenting an
 • our Sun is about half way through its life cycle – it is a information poster on the birth, life and death of stars
 medium-sized yellow star with a lifespan of about 9 billion
 years
 • for most of their life, stars change hydrogen to helium
 • later, towards the end of their life, stars like the Sun will swell
 up to form a ‘red giant’
 Death of a star
 • at some point the nuclear reaction runs out of fuel
 • for stars like the Sun, the core of the star contracts to become
 a ‘white dwarf’
 • for stars like the Sun, the outer gases of the star are ejected
 into space, where they form an expanding cloud around the
 white dwarf called a planetary nebula
 • planetary nebulae are lit up by their central white dwarf star
 and are beautiful objects to observe

 83
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
 SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES: INVESTIGATIONS, EQUIPMENT AND
 TIME TOPIC CONTENT & CONCEPTS
 PRACTICAL WORK, AND DEMONSTRATIONS RESOURCES

 84
 Assessment This content and the associated concepts must be integrated with the aims and Check the learner’s knowledge and that they can:
 guidelines skills for Natural Sciences (refer to Section 2).
 • describe the Earth as a complex system of parts (spheres) that interact with
 • Learners should read, write, draw and do practical tasks regularly each other
 • Evidence of learner’s work, including assessments, should be kept in the • identify and describe igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks
 learner’s notebook
 • explain the main processes causing the cycle of the formation of rock
 School-based assessment (including practical tasks and class tests), checking for
 correctness, and providing constructive feedback should be done regularly. • write about the processes of separating and extracting metals from ore

 As this is an exam term, the final two weeks may be required for revision. • describe the atmosphere and its layers in detail

 For more detailed guidelines on assessment, refer to Section 4. • make a model to show the greenhouse effect
 • describe the impact of global warming
 • show their understanding of the birth, life and death of stars
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT

4.1 INTRODUCTION

Assessment is a continuous and planned process of identifying, gathering, interpreting and diagnosing, information
about the performance of learners. All forms of assessment involve generating and collecting evidence of achievement;
evaluating this evidence and using this information to understand and thereby assist the learner’s development and
the teaching process.

Assessment should be both informal and formal. In both cases regular feedback should be provided to learners to
enhance the learning experience.

Informal and formal assessment

Informal assessment consists of regular checking of learners’ class work (including practical tasks) asking questions
orally and giving constructive feedback. Marks for informal assessment need not be recorded.

Formal assessment consists of selected assessment tasks, the marks of which should be recorded formally. These
assessment tasks are done throughout the year and include tests, selected practical tasks or investigations and
examinations. All marks that are recorded formally contribute to the final year mark.

Assessment is a process that measures individual learners’ attainment of knowledge (content, concepts and skills) in
a subject by collecting, analysing and interpreting the data and information obtained from this process to:

• Enable the teacher to judge a learners’ progress in a reliable way

• Inform learners of their strengths, weaknesses and progress

• Assist teachers, parents and other stakeholders in making decisions about the learning process and the
 progress of learners

Assessment should be mapped out against the content (concepts and skills) and specific aims for Natural Sciences.
In both informal and formal assessments it is important to ensure that in the course of a school year:

• all of the subject content is covered

• the full range of major skills is included. (See Section 2.7 and Section 4.5)

• a variety of different forms of assessment is used. (See Section 4.4)

4.2 INFORMAL ASSESSMENT OR DAILY ASSESSMENT

The purpose of Informal assessment is to continuously collect information on a learner’s achievement that can be
used to improve their learning.

Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. It should not be seen as separate from the learning
activities taking place in the classroom.

CAPS 85
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
Informal assessment can be done through observation, discussion, practical demonstrations, informal classroom
interactions, classwork, investigations and so on. Informal assessment may be as simple as stopping during the
lesson to observe learners or to discuss with learners how learning is progressing. Informal assessment should also
be used to provide feedback to the learners and to inform planning for teaching.

Self-assessment and peer assessment, as part of informal assessment, actively involves learners in assessment
and a teacher playing an overseeing role. This is important as it allows learners to learn from and reflect on their own
performance.

Selected informal assessment tasks may be marked by learners or teachers, but need not be recorded unless
the teacher wishes to do so. The results of daily assessment tasks are not taken into account for promotion and
certification purposes, but for improving teaching and learning.

Informal, on-going assessments should be used to encourage the acquisition of knowledge and skills and should
be the stepping stones leading up to the formal tasks in the Programme of Formal Assessment. (See Section 4.4)

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

Formal assessment tasks and tests form part of a year-long formal Programme of Assessment in each Grade
and subject. Formal assessments are marked and recorded by the teacher for progression purposes. All Formal
Assessment tasks must be moderated for the purpose of quality assurance and to ensure that appropriate standards
are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a
Grade and in a particular subject. Formal assessment tasks in Natural Sciences are tests, examinations, selected
practical tasks or investigations and a project. The project may be done at any time during the year, but the marks
must be recorded in the 4th term. (See details in Section 4.4)

The School-based assessment component in the different phases is as follows:

 Grades Formal school-based End-of-year examinations
 R-3 100% n/a
 4-6 75% 25%
 7-9 40% 60%
 10 and 11 25% 75%
 25% including school-based mid-year
 12 External examination: 75%
 and ‘trial’ examinations

Formally assessed tests and practical tasks/investigations must together reflect the whole term’s work. Weighting of
marks should reflect time allotted to each section in the curriculum content.

The cognitive demands of assessment

The cognitive demands of assessment used should be appropriate to the age and developmental level of the learners
in the grade. Assessments in Natural Sciences must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners
within this context. The assessment tasks should be carefully designed to cover the content of the subject as well as
the range of major skills that have been specified under the Process skills (See Section 2.7)

 86 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
The Specific Aims, the topics and content and the range of major skills must be used to inform the planning and
development of assessment tasks.

Cognitive levels for the assessment of content in Grades 7, 8 and 9

 Evaluating,
 Setting tests and
 Understanding Applying scientific analyzing,
 tasks for different Knowing science
 science knowledge synthesising
 cognitive levels
 scientific knowledge
 Percentages
 indicating the
 proportion of low, Low order questions Middle order questions High order questions
 middle and high
 order questions 40% 45% 15%
 in tasks, tests and
 exams
 Useful verbs to State Explain Predict Select
 use when setting
 questions Name Compare Apply Differentiate
 Label Rearrange Use knowledge to Analyse
 demonstrate
 List Illustrate Infer
 Solve
 Define Give an example Suggest a reason
 Implement
 Describe Calculate Interpret
 Judge
 and others ... Make a generalisation Discuss
 and others …
 and others … Categorise
 and others ...

These cognitive skills apply to all three Specific Aims for Natural Sciences. (See Section 2.6)

4.4 FORMAL ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR NATURAL SCIENCES

In any formal assessment, learners should be made aware of what will be assessed and how that will be assessed.

Grades 7, 8 and 9

 FORMAL TOTAL % FOR
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 ASSESSMENTS THE YEAR
 Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 *Practical task/
 School-based Investigation 4
 40%
 assessments *Practical task/ *Practical task/ *Practical task/ ***Project
 Investigation 1 Investigation 2 Investigation 3
 **Exam 1 **Exam 2
 Exams on work from on work from 60%
 terms 1 & 2 terms 3 & 4
 Number of formal
 2 3 2 3 Total: 100%
 assessments

Notes: * Grade appropriate assessment on aspects of investigation processes should form part of the selected
 practical tasks in the assessment programme for the year

 ** Content, concepts and skills across all the topics, including knowledge of investigations and some skills
 associated with practical work must be assessed in the written exams

 *** The project can be done at any time of the year but it is incorporated in the 4th term mark

CAPS 87
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
A note on tests and examinations

Tests and examinations consist of a range of questions that cover the different cognitive levels – knowing science,
understanding and applying scientific knowledge, evaluating, analysing and synthesising. (See percentages indicating
the weighting of Cognitive levels for the assessment of content under Section 4.3). The weighting of marks
should reflect time allotted to each section in the curriculum content.

A single formal class test in a term will not necessarily provide the most accurate and reliable evidence of every
learner’s performance. One formal class test in the first three terms is the minimum number that must be recorded.

Learners are required to respond to questions within a specified time under controlled conditions. Since they are
generally easy to mark reliably, they are a good way to conduct formal assessment, and can also be a useful informal
assessment tool. Examinations are similar to tests; the only difference is that they cover more content.

A note on practical tasks

In carrying out practical tasks learners are required to demonstrate their skills or proficiencies. Learners use materials
and equipment to create, produce or investigate something. The teacher observes the learner demonstrate specific
practical skills (e.g. measuring the height of a plant, manipulating materials to make models, using a thermometer to
measure temperature, etc.). Practical tasks can be very useful for assessing how learners draw on knowledge and
values to carry out practical skills (manual and/or behavioural, e.g. safety and handling of equipment).

Any practical task should provide opportunities for learners to demonstrate several different skills - see those listed
under Section 2.7. These may or may not include investigation skills. However, there are some circumstances in
which only some of these skills would apply and not every skill can be assessed in every practical task.

Practical tasks include a range of activities where learners communicate what they know and can do. Include a range
of tasks to ensure inclusivity and to accommodate different learning styles. These ways to communicate include:
acting out, speaking/discussing, drawing, making models, doing science practical work, working in the environment,
writing and doing calculations.

Assessment of practical tasks

The assessment may be based on the end-result of the activity (the product), or the carrying-out of the activity (the
process), or a combination of both. Assessment tools of projects could be a combination of rubric, memorandum,
checklist, etc.

A note on projects

Projects are tasks in which learners illustrate or apply knowledge that they have gained in class. Projects may
involve aspects of investigation and/or research. Learners may collect data to understand a particular set of
circumstances and/or phenomena. In doing this, they can build models, compile reports, essays or posters and even
give presentations. Learners can do projects individually or in groups or working alone, but with some support and
guidance from the teacher. The teacher directs the choice of the project, usually by providing the learners with a topic
or brief for the investigation.

 88 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
Assessment of projects

Teachers can assess different stages of projects separately, or the entire project. Assessment of projects should be
based on the understanding of content, application of skills and values applicable in a relevant context and may vary
in extent. Projects may be done in class and should be sufficiently diverse to promote inclusivity. Assessment tools
of projects could be a combination of rubric, memorandum, checklist, etc. One project per year must be done in the
Senior Phase. It can be done in any term, but the marks must be recorded in term 4.

4.5 RECORDING AND REPORTING

4.5.1 Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific
assessment task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in the
Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the
learner’s conceptual progression within a grade and her/his readiness to be promoted to the next Grade. Records of
learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners in the teaching and
learning process. Records should be used to monitor learning and to plan ahead.

Guidelines on how the major process skills can be recorded for marks in Natural Sciences

Many of these major process skills (also refer to Section 2.7) are combined into one activity. Not every major skill
needs to be marked and recorded in each task.

 Natural Sciences major investigation process skills Mark allocation
 Writing the topic
 Raising/ writing a question to investigate
 Making a prediction/ hypothesis
 Planning the investigation
 Collecting data
 Recording data
 Evaluating and communicating results
 Total

4.5.2 Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other
stakeholders. Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’
meetings, school visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters, etc.

Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages against
the subject on the learners’ report cards. Percentages are reported and may be related to the 7-point rating
code. (See Section 4.5.4)

Schools are required to provide quarterly feedback to parents on the Programme of Formal Assessment, using a
formal reporting tool, such as a report card. The schedule and the report card should indicate the overall level of
performance of a learner.

CAPS 89
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
4.5.3 Mark allocation

A minimum mark allocation is prescribed for the tests, tasks, project and examinations for each Grade in the Senior
Phase.

For purposes of reporting, the marks for the assessment tasks of each term must be combined to create a mark out
of 100 (a percentage). For Term 2 and for the overall year mark (calculated at the end of Term 4), the school based
assessments and examinations should be combined in the ratio 40:60.

See the examples for each Grade below.

GRADE 7 (Example based on minimum prescribed marks)

 FORMAL TOTAL % FOR
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 ASSESSMENTS THE YEAR
 Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 Practical task /
 (30 marks) (30 marks) (30 marks) Investigation 4
 (20 marks)
 School-based
 40%
 assessments
 Practical task / Practical task / Practical task / Project
 Investigation 1 Investigation 2 Investigation 3 (20 marks)1
 (20 marks) (20 marks) (20 marks)
 Exam 1 Exam 2
 on work from on work from
 Exams 60%
 terms 1 & 2 terms 3 & 4
 (60 marks) (60 marks)
 Number of formal
 2 3 2 3 Total: 100%
 assessments

1. Calculating the marks for each term:

 Term 1 (%) = (Test 1 mark + Practical task 1 mark) ÷ (30 + 20) × 100

 Term 2 (%) = (Test 2 mark + Practical 2 mark) ÷ (30 + 20) × 40 + (Exam 1 mark ÷ 60) × 60

 Term 3 (%) = (Test 3 mark + Practical 3 mark) ÷ (30 + 20) × 100

 Term 4 (%) = Final year mark (see number 4 below)

2. Calculating the School-based assessment mark:

 School-based assessment mark = (Test 1 mark + Test 2 mark + Test 3 mark + Practical 1 + Practical 2 mark +
 Practical 3 mark + Practical 4 mark + Project mark) ÷ (30 + 30 + 30 + 20 + 20 + 20 + 20 + 20) × 100

3. Calculating the Exam mark:

 Exam mark = (Exam 1 mark + Exam 2 mark) ÷ (60 + 60) × 100

4. Calculating the Final year mark:

 Final year mark = (School based assessment mark × 0,4) + (Exam mark × 0,6)

 Percentages are reported and may be related to the 7-point rating code as given below.

 90 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
GRADE 8 (Example based on minimum prescribed marks)

 FORMAL TOTAL % FOR
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 ASSESSMENTS THE YEAR
 Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 Practical task /
 Investigation 4
 (35 marks) (35 marks) (35 marks)
 (20 marks)
 School-based
 40%
 assessments Practical task / Practical task / Practical task / Project
 Investigation 1 Investigation 2 Investigation 3 (30 marks)2
 (20 marks) (20 marks) (20 marks)
 Exam 1 Exam 2
 on work from on work from
 Exams 60%
 terms 1 & 2 terms 3 & 4
 (70 marks) (70 marks)
 Number of formal
 2 3 2 3 Total: 100%
 assessments

1. Calculating the marks for each term:

 Term 1 (%) = (Test 1 mark + Practical task 1 mark) ÷ (35 + 20) × 100

 Term 2 (%) = (Test 2 mark + Practical 2 mark) ÷ (35 + 20) × 40 + (Exam 1 mark ÷ 70) × 60

 Term 3 (%) = (Test 3 mark + Practical 3 mark) ÷ (35 + 20) × 100

 Term 4 (%) = Final year mark (see number 4 below)

2. Calculating the School-based assessment mark:

 School-based assessment mark = (Test 1 mark + Test 2 mark + Test 3 mark + Practical 1 + Practical 2 mark +
 Practical 3 mark + Practical 4 mark + Project mark) ÷ (35 + 35 + 35 + 20 + 20 + 20 + 20 + 30) × 100

3. Calculating the Exam mark:

 Exam mark = (Exam 1 mark + Exam 2 mark) ÷ (70 + 70) × 100

4. Calculating the Final year mark:

 Final year mark = (School based assessment mark × 0,4) + (Exam mark × 0,6)

 Percentages are reported and may be related to the 7-point rating code as given below.

CAPS 91
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
GRADE 9 (Example based on minimum prescribed marks)

 FORMAL TOTAL % FOR
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 ASSESSMENTS THE YEAR
 Test 1 Test 2 Test 3 Practical task /
 Investigation 4
 (40 marks) (40 marks) (40 marks)
 (20 marks)
 School-based
 40%
 assessments Practical task / Practical task / Practical task / Project
 Investigation 1 Investigation 2 Investigation 3 (50 marks)3
 (20 marks) (20 marks) (20 marks)
 Exam 1 Exam 2
 on work from on work from
 Exams 60%
 terms 1 & 2 terms 3 & 4
 (80 marks) (80 marks)
 Number of formal
 2 3 2 3 Total: 100%
 assessments

1. Calculating the marks for each term:

 Term 1 (%) = (Test 1 mark + Practical task 1 mark) ÷ (40 + 20) × 100

 Term 2 (%) = (Test 2 mark + Practical 2 mark) ÷ (40 + 20) × 40 + (Exam 1 mark ÷ 80) × 60

 Term 3 (%) = (Test 3 mark + Practical 3 mark) ÷ (40 + 20) × 100

 Term 4 (%) = Final year mark (see number 4 below)

2. Calculating the School-based assessment mark:

 School-based assessment mark = (Test 1 mark + Test 2 mark + Test 3 mark + Practical 1 + Practical 2 mark +
 Practical 3 mark + Practical 4 mark + Project mark) ÷ (40 + 40 + 40 + 20 + 20 + 20 + 20 + 50) × 100

3. Calculating the Exam mark:

 Exam mark = (Exam 1 mark + Exam 2 mark) ÷ (80 + 80) × 100

4. Calculating the Final year mark:

 Final year mark = (School based assessment mark × 0,4) + (Exam mark × 0,6)

 Percentages are reported and may be related to the 7-point rating code as given below.

 92 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9
4.5.4 Codes and percentages for reporting in Grades R – 12

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE
 7 Outstanding achievement 80 – 100
 6 Meritorious achievement 70 – 79
 5 Substantial achievement 60 – 69
 4 Adequate achievement 50 – 59
 3 Moderate achievement 40 – 49
 2 Elementary achievement 30 – 39
 1 Not achieved 0 – 29

4.6 MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT

Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should
be implemented at school, district and, if necessary provincial levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation
practices must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

In Grades 7, 8 & 9 the formal School-based assessment (including the practical assessment tasks) should be
moderated by the relevant subject specialist(s) at district level and if necessary at provincial level in consultation with
the moderators at school. Moderation serves the following purposes:

1. It should ascertain whether the subject content and skills have been taught and assessed. (sufficiently covered)

2. It should ensure that the correct balance of cognitive demands is reflected in the assessment.

3. It should ensure that the assessments and marking are of an acceptable standard and consistency.

4. It should identify areas in which the teacher may need further development and should lead to support for such
 development.

5. It should reflect the scope covered by the teacher in line with the term’s requirement.

Moderation is therefore an ongoing process and not a once-off event at the end of the year. There is no national
moderation in the Senior Phase.

4.7 GENERAL

This document should be read in conjunction with:

4.7.1 National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement
 Grades R – 12; and

4.7.2 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R – 12.

(Footnotes)

1 (NB – the project can be done at any time of the year but it is incorporated in the 4th term mark)

2 (NB – the project can be done at any time of the year but it is incorporated in the 4th term mark)

3 (NB – the project can be done at any time of the year but it is incorporated in the 4th term mark)

CAPS 93
 NATURAL SCIENCES GRADES 7-9

 94 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)