SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE

 National Curriculum Statement (NCS)

 Curriculum Assessment
 Policy Statement
| HOME LANGUAGE

 Senior Phase
 Grades 7 - 9

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 i
 ii CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
 HOME LANGUAGE

 SENIOR PHASE
 Grades 7-9

 National Curriculum Statement (NCS)
 Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 iii
 Department of Basic Education

222 Struben Street

Private Bag X895

Pretoria 0001

South Africa

Tel: +27 12 357 3000

Fax: +27 12 323-0601

120 Plein Street

Private Bag X9023

Cape Town 8000

South Africa

Tel: +27 21 465-1701

Fax: +27 21 461-8110

Website: http://www.education.gov.za

© 2014 Department of Basic Education

ISBN: 978-1-4315-1953-8
 FOREWORD BY THE MINISTER
 Our national curriculum is the culmination of our efforts over a period of seventeen
 years to transform the curriculum bequeathed to us by apartheid. From the
 start of democracy we have built our curriculum on the values that inspired our
 Constitution (Act 108 of 1996). The Preamble to the Constitution states that the
 aims of the Constitution are to:

 • heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic
 values, social justice and fundamental human rights;

 • improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person;

 • lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government
 is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by
 law; and

• build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of
 nations.

Education and the curriculum have an important role to play in realising these aims.

In 1997 we introduced outcomes-based education to overcome the curricular divisions of the past, but the experience
of implementation prompted a review in 2000. This led to the first curriculum revision: the Revised National Curriculum
Statement Grades R-9 and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (2002).

Ongoing implementation challenges resulted in another review in 2009 and we revised the Revised National
Curriculum Statement (2002) and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 to produce this document.

From 2010, we undertook the development of Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS) for the South
African Sign Language (SASL) Grades R-12 which were completed and approved as policy in July 2014. For a long
time, learners who are Deaf were persistently marginalised as they had been deprived of a home language, resulting
in their education not being one of quality. This has impacted the extent of their retention within the system and their
opportunities of studying further up to and including higher education institutions.

This ground-breaking work has however, ensured that the Department complies with the provision of the South
African Schools Act (84 of 1996) which recognises the SASL as a language of learning and teaching (LOLT). The
CAPS for SASL therefore begins a new era in the educational experiences of Deaf learners in the system and is part
of the Department’s commitment to improving the quality of education for all.

MRS AM MOTSHEKGA, MP
MINISTER
 CONTENTS
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT 2

1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

1.2 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

1.3 General aims of the South African curriculum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

1.4 Time allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

 1.4.1 Foundation Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 1.4.3 Senior Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

 1.4.4 Grades 10-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

SECTION 2: INTRODUCING SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

2.1 Language levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

2.2 Introducing South African Sign Language (SASL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

2.3 The language skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

2.4 Language teaching approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

2.5 Sign bilingualism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

2.6 Time allocation for the Home Language (SASL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

2.7 Bridging SASL grade 9 programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

2.8 Learning and Teaching Support Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

SECTION 3: CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
SKILLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

3.1 Observing and Signing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

3.2 Visual Reading and Viewing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24

3.3 Recording . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

3.4 Language structures and conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

3.5 Teaching plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

 Grade 7: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

 Grade 8: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

 Grade 9: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

 Bridging Grade 9: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 vi
 SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT IN SASL HOME LANGUAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

4.2 Informal or daily assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68

4.3 Formal assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68

 4.3.1 Formal assessment requirements for SASL Home Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

 4.3.2 The form of tasks per term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

4.4 Programme of Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72

4.5 Recording and reporting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

4.6 Moderation of assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75

4.7 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76

GLOSSARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77

 1 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND
ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
1.1 BACKGROUND

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the
schooling sector.

To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming into
effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was developed for
each subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines
in Grades R-12.

1.2 OVERVIEW

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for learning
 and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12 (January 2012).

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) replaces the two current national curricula
 statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of 31 May 2002,
 and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6 October 2003 and
 No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii) comprise the following policy
 documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January
 2012) during the period 2012-2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment
 Guidelines for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the General
 Education and Training Band, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in Government Gazette No.
 29626 of 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette No.27819 of 20 July 2005;

 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special
 needs, published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy
 document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 2
 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol
 for Assessment (Grades R-12), promulgated in Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette
 No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.

 (vi) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of
 the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment
 Policy as contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South African
 Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to determine
 minimum outcomes and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the assessment of
 learner achievement to be applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 GENERAL AIMS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN CURRICULUM

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values worth
 learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply knowledge
 and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes knowledge in
 local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 serves the purposes of:

 • equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability
 or intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment, and meaningful
 participation in society as citizens of a free country;

 • providing access to higher education;

 • facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and

 • providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is based on the following principles:

 • Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that equal
 educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;

 • Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than rote and
 uncritical learning of given truths;

 • High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at each
 grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;

 • Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

 • Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices of social and
 environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is sensitive to issues of diversity such as poverty, inequality, race,
 gender, language, age, disability and other factors;

 • Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country as
 important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

 3 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and depth to
 those of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

 • identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;

 • work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

 • organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;

 • collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

 • communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;

 • use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the environment
 and the health of others; and

 • demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem
 solving contexts do not exist in isolation.

(e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This can
 only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to learning,
 and how to plan for diversity.

The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant support
structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based Support Teams, Institutional-Level Support
Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers in the classroom, teachers should
use various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those included in the Department of Basic Education’s
Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

1.4 TIME ALLOCATION

1.4.1 Foundation Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 GRADE R GRADES 1-2 GRADE 3
 SUBJECT
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)
 Home Language 10 8/7 8/7

 South African Sign Language 5,5 6
 First Additional Language 2/3 3/4
 4,5 5
 Mathematics 7 7 7
 Life Skills 6 6 7
 • Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)
 • Creative Arts (2) (2) (2)
 • Physical Education (2) (2) (2)
 • Personal and Social Well-being (1) (1) (1)
 TOTAL 23 23 25

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 4
 (b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8 hours and a
 minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and a maximum of 3 hours for
 Additional Language in Grades 1-2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated
 for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

For Deaf learners who select SASL as their Home Language the time allocation is as follows:

 Home Language First Additional
 (Hours) Language
 (Hours)
 Grade R 10 10

 Grade 1 5,5 4,5 10
 Grade 2 5,5 4,5 10
 Grade 3 6 5 11

This adjustment will enable Deaf learners to develop competency in handwriting which is not in the FAL curriculum
and will also not be covered in the SASL Home Language curriculum as SASL does not have a written form.

(d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R – 2 and 2 hours as indicated by the hours
 in brackets for Grade 3.

1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Mathematics 6
 Natural Sciences and Technology 3,5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4
 • Creative Arts (1,5)
 • Physical Education (1)
 • Personal and Social Well-being (1,5)
 TOTAL 27,5

 5 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 1.4.3 Senior Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 5
 First Additional Language 4
 Mathematics 4,5
 Natural Sciences 3
 Social Sciences 3
 Technology 2
 Economic Management Sciences 2
 Life Orientation 2
 Creative Arts 2
 TOTAL 27,5

1.4.4 Grades 10-12

(a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)

 Home Language 4,5
 First Additional Language 4,5
 Mathematics 4,5
 Life Orientation 2
 A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group B 12 (3x4h)
 Annexure B, Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National
 policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements
 of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, subject
 to the provisos stipulated in paragraph 28 of the said policy
 document.
 TOTAL 27,5

The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified above, and
may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish to offer
additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 6
 SECTION 2: INTRODUCING SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE HOME
LANGUAGE
Language is a tool for thought and communication. It is also a cultural and aesthetic means commonly shared among
a people to make better sense of the world they live in. Learning to use language effectively enables learners to
acquire knowledge, to express their identity, feelings and ideas, to interact with others, and to manage their world. It
also provides learners with a rich, powerful and deeply rooted set of images and ideas that can be used to make their
world other than it is; better and clearer than it is. It is through language that cultural diversity and social relations
are expressed and constructed, and it is through language that such constructions can be altered, broadened and
refined.

2.1 LANGUAGE LEVELS

Language learning in the Intermediate Phase includes all the official languages in South Africa, namely, Afrikaans,
English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa, isiZulu, Sepedi (Sesotho sa Leboa), Sesotho, Setswana, Siswati, Tshivenda, Xitsonga

– as well as non-official Languages, such as South African Sign Language (SASL) . These languages can be offered
at different language levels. SASL is offered as a subject at Home Language level. This is in anticipation of the
officialisation of SASL at which time it can be offered as a language.

Home Language is the language first acquired by learners. However, many South African schools do not offer
the home languages of some or all of the enrolled learners but rather have one or two languages offered at Home
Language level. As a result, the labels Home Language and First Additional Language refer to the proficiency levels
at which the language is offered and not the native (Home) or acquired (as in the additional languages) language.
For the purposes of this policy, any reference to Home Language should be understood to refer to the level of the
language and not to whether the language is used at home or not. SASL is offered as a Home Language, as it is the
language in which Deaf learners are most naturally proficient.

The Home Language (HL) level provides for language proficiency that reflects the basic interpersonal communication
skills required in social situations and the cognitive academic skills essential for learning across the curriculum.
Emphasis is placed on the teaching of Observing, Signing, Visual Reading and Recording skills at this language
level. This level also provides learners with a literary, aesthetic and imaginative ability to recreate, imagine, and
empower their understandings of the world they live in. However, the emphasis and the weighting for Observing and
Signing from Grade 7 onwards are lower than those of the Visual Reading and Recording skills.

The First Additional Language (FAL) refers to a language which is not a mother tongue but which is used for
certain communicative functions in a society, that is, medium of learning and teaching in education. The curriculum
provides strong support for those learners who will use their first additional language as a language of learning
and teaching. By the end of Grade 9, these learners should be able to use their home language and first additional
language effectively and with confidence for a variety of purposes, including learning.

For Deaf learners the medium of learning and teaching is SASL. Since SASL does not have a written form the FAL
serves as the language of literacy. Therefore both languages need to be used alongside each other in a bilingual-
bicultural approach to teaching and learning. All face-to-face teaching and learning takes place through the medium
of SASL while written text is in the FAL (such as English or any other spoken language).

In South Africa, many children start using their additional language, English, as the Language of Learning and
Teaching (LoLT) in Grade 4. This means that they must reach a high level of competence in English by the end of
Grade 3, and they need to be able to read and write well in English. For Deaf learners the language of learning and
teaching will remain SASL through to Grade 12 alongside a written language which is the language of literacy and
provides access to all written text. For this reason Deaf learners, too, need to be able to read and write well in English.

 7 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 The First Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge of the language
when they arrive at school. The focus in the first few years of school is on developing learners’ ability to understand
and speak the language – basic interpersonal communication skills. In Grades 2 and 3 learners start to build literacy
on this oral foundation. They also apply the literacy skills they have already learned in their Home Language. However
for the majority of Deaf learners the FAL can only be accessed in its written form and is their language of literacy.

In the Intermediate and Senior Phases, Deaf learners continue to strengthen their reading and writing skills in the FAL.
At this stage the majority of Deaf children are learning both through the medium of SASL and through their First
Additional Language, English, and should be getting more exposure to written English. Greater emphasis is therefore
placed on using SASL and the First Additional Language for the purposes of thinking and reasoning. This enables
learners to develop their cognitive academic skills, which they need to study subjects like Science. They also engage
more with signed and written literary texts and begin to develop aesthetic and imaginative ability.

By the time learners enter Senior Phase, they should be reasonably proficient in their First Additional Language with
regard to both interpersonal and cognitive academic skills. However, the reality is that many Deaf learners are still
not adequately competent in the FAL at this stage. The challenge in the Intermediate Phase, therefore, is to provide
support for these learners at the same time as providing a curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards
required in further grades. These standards must be such that learners can use the FAL at a high level of proficiency
to prepare them for further or higher education or the world of work. It is therefore recommended that, where possible,
learners in the senior phase be exposed to the same concepts in the weekly cycles in both language levels.

2.2 INTRODUCING SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE (SASL)

The Minister of Education appointed a ministerial committee, the Curriculum Management Team (CMT), to oversee
the development and implementation of South African Sign Language (SASL) as a subject to be taught in schools.
The Department of Basic Education (DBE) and the CMT appointed a writing team to develop CAPS for SASL. It was
decided to develop SASL as a Home Language (rather than a First Additional Language) to parallel the process of
attaining official status for SASL in South Africa. The decision by the SASL CMT was to make the CAPS of SASL as
close as possible to the other Home Languages in terms of structure, content and sequence.

“As long as we have Deaf people on earth, we will have sign language” (George W. Veditz, 1913).

South African Sign Language (SASL) is a visual-spatial language used by the Deaf community of South Africa. SASL
is a natural language on par with spoken languages that allows users the opportunity to learn and communicate and
to express thoughts, feelings and abstract ideas.

Signed languages use a different modality to spoken languages with meaning being made by non-verbal forms
of communication including movement of the hands, upper body and face. Signs in SASL are made up of five
parameters: hand-shape, location, movement, palm orientation and the non-manual features such as specific facial
expressions that carry important grammatical information. SASL has its own distinct linguistic structure that includes
syntax, morphology, phonology and language conventions. It is not based on any written or spoken language.
Fingerspelling is not signed language, but is used by signers to represent the written form when needed (e.g. proper
nouns, acronyms and technical jargon).

“Sign Language is a real language, equivalent to any other language. Deaf persons can sign about any topic,
concrete or abstract as economically and as effectively, as rapidly and as grammatical as hearing people can. Sign
language is influenced by equivalent historical social and psychological factors as spoken language – there are rules
for attention-getting, turn-taking, story-telling; there are jokes, puns, and taboo signs; there are generational effects
observed in Sign Language and metaphors and ‘slips-of-the-hand’” (Penn, 1993: 12).

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 8
 Historically, SASL has emerged with regional variations that mirror the country’s oppressive past which segregated
the education of deaf learners. Research has shown that despite these regional and historical differences, there is a
cohesive and commonly used South African Sign Language that unifies Deaf people across the country. All local/
regional language variations (dialects) of SASL are acceptable as part of the richness of the language. SASL is not
yet accepted as an official language of South Africa although the South African School’s Act (November, 1996) states
that, “A recognised Sign Language has the status of an official language for purposes of learning at a public school”
(Chapter 2, 6.4). Civil society organizations continue to lobby for the recognition of language rights of deaf learners.

Signed language is acquired by Deaf children who are raised in Deaf families in the same way hearing children
acquire spoken language from their hearing parents. The overwhelming majority of deaf children are born to hearing
parents and acquire sign language from their peers and Deaf teachers in schools for the Deaf. It is important to
establish an age appropriate SASL language base for all learners from which they can access the curriculum and
develop literacy skills.

In developing this curriculum several assumptions were made including that the CAPS for SASL would match
as closely as possible other Home Languages in terms of structure, content and sequence; that teachers of the
curriculum would be skilled in SASL and appropriate teaching methodologies and that appropriate SASL learning and
teaching support material (LTSM) would to be identified and developed.

It is acknowledged that there is as yet insufficient research on SASL. This means that there has been borrowing
from the research done with other signed languages around the world and addendums to the SASL curriculum will
be included based on on-going research here in South Africa and internationally. Teachers of SASL are encouraged
to use their classrooms as a research resource and all language variations (dialects) are recognised as part of the
richness of the language.

Notes on terminology:

Deaf (with a capital D) is used to denote a distinct cultural and linguistic group of Deaf people who use South African
Sign Language as their language of choice. The Deaf Community has a distinct identity and their experience of the
world is particularly shaped by the fact that their communication is expressed by their bodies and perceived visually.
This group may include hearing children of Deaf parents and other hearing people who are users of SASL and
immerse themselves in the Deaf Community e.g. SASL interpreters.

However deaf (with a lower case d) is an adjective referring to hearing loss from an audiological point of view. Many
deaf people use spoken language to communicate. This group includes people who have lost their hearing through
e.g. age, illness and trauma.

Some verbs in common usage have a connotation of being associated only with spoken languages. These verbs
appear in the curriculum documents in inverted commas and must be used and understood in a signed context.
Examples: “listen to”, “tell”, “listening”,” say”, “a speech”, “something to say”, “read”, “voice”.

Throughout the SASL CAPS the term ‘text’ used to denote a body of work should be understood as signed texts.
These texts e.g. stories, poems, reports are presented in live SASL or may be recorded in SASL. These are NOT
written texts.

Where it is necessary for clarity, the capitalised first letter of the word is used to denote the skill or outcome and the
one in lower case is the action or the verb i.e. Signing (the skill) versus signing (the action).

Where SASL GLOSS (the signs represented in English written form) is used, it is presented in upper case as per
convention.

 9 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 2.3 THE LANGUAGE SKILLS

The skills outlined in the CAPS document were used and adapted for SASL.

The skills in the SASL curriculum are:

 CAPS English Home Language CAPS SASL Home Language
 Listening and speaking Observing & Signing
 Phonological awareness (Foundation Phase only) Phonological Awareness
 Reading and viewing Visual Reading and Viewing
 Writing & presenting Recording
 Language structure and use (not for Foundation Phase) Language Structure and Use

 CAPS SASL Home Language Description
 Observing & Signing This skill is done with live (face-to-face) signing of a variety of signed texts

 Phonological Awareness Distinction between spoken and Sign Language phonology – phonemes
 (working with parameters) (smallest building blocks/units of a language) sounds vs. parameters.
 Visual Reading and Viewing This is done with recorded SASL material
 Recording Signed texts are recorded and presented by learners
 Language Structure and Use From Intermediate Phase to FET. In the Foundation Phase this skill is
 integrated in the other skills and not taught separately.

2.4 LANGUAGE TEACHING APPROACHES

The approaches to teaching language are text-based, communicative and process orientated. The text-based
approach and the communicative approach are both dependent on the continuous use and production of texts.

A text-based approach explores how texts work. The purpose of a text-based approach is to enable learners to
become competent, confident and critical “readers”, authors, viewers and designers of texts. It involves observing,
“reading”, viewing and analysing texts to understand how they are produced and what their effects are. Through this
critical interaction, learners develop the ability to evaluate texts. The text-based approach also involves producing
different kinds of texts for particular purposes and audiences. This approach is informed by an understanding of how
texts are constructed.

A communicative approach suggests that when learning a language, a learner should have an extensive exposure
to the target language (SASL) and many opportunities to practise or produce the language by communicating for
social or practical purposes. Language learning should be carried over into the classroom where skills are learned
through frequent opportunities to view and record texts.

Language teaching happens in an integrated way, with the teacher modelling good practice, the learners practising
the appropriate skills in groups before applying these skills on their own. The structure of each lesson should be one
that engages the whole class before practising in groups and applying the new skill individually.

The process approach is used when learners produce signed and recorded texts. The learners engage in different
stages of the Observing, Signing, Visual Reading and Recording processes. They must think of the audience and
the purpose during these processes. This will enable them to communicate and express their thoughts in a natural
way For example, the teaching of recording does not focus on the product only but also focus on the process of
recording. Learners are taught how to generate ideas, to think about the purpose and audience, to record drafts, to
edit their work and to present a recorded product that communicates their thoughts.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 10
 Approaches to teaching literature

The teaching of literature should focus on teaching for comprehension and will include the visual reading process
strategies (“pre-reading”, “reading” and “post-reading”). The main reason for “reading” literature in the classroom
is to develop in learners a sensitivity to a special use of language that is more refined, literary, figurative, symbolic,
and deeply meaningful than much of what else they may “read”. While most literary texts are forms of entertainment,
amusement, or revelation, serious authors create longer stories , plays and poems because they have ideas, thoughts
and issues; principles, ideologies and beliefs that they most want to share with or reveal to their prospective viewers.
Their imaginative use of language is an added method of revealing, reinforcing, and highlighting their ideas.

The teaching of literature is never easy, but it is impossible without the personal, thoughtful and honest interpretations
and comments from the learners themselves. Unless they learn how to understand a literary text on their own, they
will not have learned much. Teachers often need to restrain their own interpretations and ideas of literary texts, and
allow as much learner participation as is reasonable. Interpretation is not about right or wrong. It is about searching
for what is meaningful to the viewer.

The best ways to approach the teaching of literature would involve some or all of the following.

●● Make every attempt to “read” as much of the text in class as possible without breaking for any other activity.
 This should not take more than three weeks. It is essential that learners have a clear idea of what is going on at
 the most basic level of the text. Spending too long on “reading” a text is deleterious to a clear understanding of
 narrative line and plot. Some classes can “read” texts without such support. That is to be encouraged. Poetry
 should be taught, not poems. “Read” as many as possible in class, and ensure that learners record poems as well.

●● Literary interpretation is essentially a university level activity, and learners in this phase do not have to learn this
 advanced level of interpretation. However, the purpose of teaching literary texts is to show learners how their
 home language can be used with subtlety, intelligence, imagination and flair. This means a close look at how text
 is being created, manipulated, and re-arranged to clarify and emphasise what is being expressed. Such work
 might involve examining the presence or absence of imagery; what kind of imagery is being selected by the author
 and why; sentence structures and chunking, or the structure of poems; choice of signs, continuing motifs through
 the text; the use of symbol and colour where appropriate.

●● Creative recording should be closely attached to the study of any literary text. Recording and presenting activities that
 demand a close understanding of the text being “read” can prove very helpful in reaching more creative levels of
 appreciation on the part of the learners. Class discussions can be fruitful as long as everyone is involved. But class
 discussions that lead to recorded work activities serve a clearer purpose and benefit both.

●● Finally, it is important to point out that Literature is not about right answers. A whole text means something, not
 just bits and pieces of it; a good “reading” of a text incorporates the whole text in interpretative, creative, personal,
 and exploratory practices.

The other approaches to literature which can be integrated with teaching for comprehension and for understanding
the key features of literature are the chronological, the author, the theme and the genre approaches. These
approaches can be combined.

In the chronological approach learners can research and combine the literature period with the historical events
for the same timeframe.

In the author approach, learners can participate in a broad and deep study of an author especially in poetry and can
link his/her poems with a particular historical period.

In the theme approach learners can look at themes such as justice, success and love across a number of poems

 11 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 or across different genres and relate them to events in real life situations. They can make judgments about the
character’s actions and comment on the theme.

Regarding the genre approach, learners can classify, compare and contrast different types of literary genre, e.g., the
difference between the plots in a longer story/ short story/drama/folklore.

Approaches to teaching language usage

The teaching of language structure should focus on how language is used and what can be done with language, i.e.
how to make meaning, how to attend to problems and interests, influence friends and colleagues, and how to create
a rich social life. The teaching of language structures should be a means to getting things done.

The teaching of language structures/ grammatical structures should therefore be text-based, communicative and
integrated.

The following principles should be taken into consideration when teaching language use:

●● Grammar should be taught for constructing texts in their context of use.

●● The application of grammar should not be restricted to the analysis of isolated sentences – it should explain the
 way in which sentences are structured to construct whole texts such as stories, essays, messages, reports which
 learners learn to view and record.

●● The use of authentic materials such as dialogues, interviews must be encouraged.

●● Link the language structure with functional uses of language in different social settings, e.g. expressing one’s
 thoughts or feelings; introducing people; talking about or reporting things, actions, events or people in the
 environment, in the past or in the future; making requests; making suggestions; offering food or drinks and
 accepting or declining politely; giving and responding to instructions; comparing or contrasting things.

●● Use classroom activities that relate language forms with functions, e.g. the past tense with a narrative essay and
 report writing.

●● Focus on meaningful tasks. Acquiring the grammatical rules of the language does not necessarily enable the
 learner to use the language in a coherent and meaningful way. What interests us then concerns the structure and
 function beyond the sentence level, i.e. the way in which people use either live signed language (discourse) or
 recorded texts in coherent and meaningful ways.

2.5 SIGN BILINGUALISM

Sign bilingualism is the use of two languages in different modalities, that is, a signed and either a spoken or written
language, and is distinctly different from using two spoken languages. In deaf education, sign-bilingualism uses
the signed language of the Deaf community and the written/spoken language of the hearing community amongst
whom the deaf live. In South Africa, the signed language is SASL and the written/spoken would be one or more of
the several indigenous languages, such as Afrikaans, isiZulu, Sesotho, Xhosa or English. Acquisition of the signed
language is prioritized and there is a parallel strong influence on teaching reading and writing of the second language
which is introduced through the signed language to explain syntax and abstract concepts. The intention of the sign
bilingualism philosophy is to enable Deaf children to become bilingual and bicultural, and to participate fully in both
the hearing society and the ‘Deaf-World’. Rather than regard deafness as an obstacle to linguistic development,
educational achievement, social integration and linguistic pluralism is encouraged.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 12
 Researchers are of the view that for the deaf child to achieve first language competence in the formative
years, the child must be assured the right of access to signed language early in life, in an environment
with skilled signers. The national signed language should be the medium of teaching and learning for all
subjects in the academic curriculum, while one of the spoken languages will be the language of literacy. In
facilitating bilingual educational programmes, both languages should exist independently but be equal in
status. Learners are taught face-to-face through the medium of SASL and will read text and write in English
or in the indigenous spoken language of the respective ethnic group in which they were born or raised.

2.6 TIME ALLOCATION FOR THE HOME LANGUAGE (SASL)

The teaching time for the Home Language and the First Additional Language is 5 and 4 hours respectively per week
as per policy prescription. However, in the Senior Phase, it is recommended that 5 hours be allocated to the language
of learning and teaching and 4 hours to another compulsory language. Schools that are using First Additional
Language as a language of learning and teaching, should therefore allocate 5 hours for that language.

All language content is taught within a three-week cycle (15 (12) hours). Teachers do not have to stick rigidly to
this cycle but must ensure that the language skills, especially Visual Reading and Recording are practised.
The time allocation for the different language skills in Grade 7-9 is 36 weeks. Four weeks are for examination
purposes – two weeks for June examination and another two weeks for December examination.

Timetabling should make provision for continuous double periods per week. In a three-week cycle the following time
allocation for the different language skills is suggested.

Recommended time for SASL

 Skills Time allocation per three-week cycle (hours)
 Grade 7 Grade 8 Grade9
 *Observing and Signing 3 hours
 *Visual Reading and Viewing 5 hours 15 minutes
 *Recording 5 hours 15 minutes
 Language use and 1,5 hours
 Conventions
 *Language Structures and Conventions and their usage are integrated within
 the time allocation of the four language skills. There is also time allocated for
 formal practice. Thinking and reasoning skills are incorporated into the skills and
 strategies required for Listening and Speaking, for Reading and Viewing, and for
 Writing and Presenting.

Recommended time for another compulsory language – for Deaf learners

 Skills Time allocation per three-week cycle (hours)
 Grade 7 Grade 8 Grade 9
 *Listening and Speaking 2 hours
 (Observing and Signing)
 *Reading and Viewing 3 hours
 ( 1 hour 30 mins for comprehension and 1 hour 30 mins for literary texts.)
 *Writing and Presenting 2 hours

 13 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Language use and 1 hour
 Conventions
 *Language Structures and Conventions and their usage are integrated within
 the time allocation of the four language skills. There is also time allocated for
 formal practice. Thinking and reasoning skills are incorporated into the skills and
 strategies required for Listening and Speaking, for Reading and Viewing, and for
 Writing and Presenting.

2.7 BRIDGING SASL GRADES 9 AND 10 PROGRAMME

The CAPS for SASL Grade 9 will be implemented simultaneously with SASL in the Foundation Phase. A Bridging
SASL Grades 9 and 10 Programme has been developed in order to introduce the subject into the FET Phase. The
Bridging Programme has been developed since SASL is a new language/subject in the overall curriculum and it would
therefore not be appropriate and feasible to rollout the subject in grades 10-12 without prior knowledge and exposure
to the language/subject. The interim plan is for all schools to implement the Bridging Grade 9 Programme which aims
to fast track learners to a grade 9 level in SASL until such time that SASL is formally taught in all the Senior Phase
grades according to the official implementation plan. This will assist learners to accomplish the language/subject
requirements and succeed with SASL as a subject in the FET Phase.

2.8 LEARNING AND TEACHING SUPPORT MATERIALS

Home language teachers should have:

(a) A Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement document

(b) Language in Education Policy

(c) Language textbook for resource purposes

(d) SASL Dictionary

(e) Literature genres

(f) A variety of media materials: news/ magazines items

(g) Access to visual aids to be used in the classroom

Classroom resources

(a) Digital cameras / video recorders / tripods

(b) Memory cards / flash drives

(c) TV monitors and DVD players

(d) Computers / software for editing

(e) A range of DVDs to accommodate different reading levels

(f) OPTIONAL: Webcam facilities / broadband internet access / smart-board / smart phone with video recording
 and viewing capabilities

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 14
 SECTION 3: CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN
LANGUAGE SKILLS
This section is divided into TWO components, the contents for the language skills and the Teaching Plans.

 3.1 Observing and Signing

 Note: Observing and Signing is done with live signing and not with recorded SASL material.
 Observing process

 ●● Pre-observing – to prepare/orientate learners towards a text. (Set the context, generate interest, activate
 vocabulary, predict content, activate existing knowledge, build prior knowledge and establish purpose).

 ●● During observing – question, recognise, match, analyse the message and the signer’s evidence, find meaning,
 ask questions, make inferences and confirm predictions, reflect and evaluate.

 ●● Post-observing – ask questions, discuss what was signed, summarise the presentation, analyse and evaluate
 critically what you have observed, do role play, give personal views, relate content to own experience and
 reflect on the presentation.

 Learners must understand the observing process and must be able to:

 Observe for specific information

 Observing, rather than merely watching, remains key to any intelligent response to the world around us. Learning
 to observe only what may be significant or useful is crucial. Most of what is listed below will not be unfamiliar to
 students in this phase, and teachers need to work only with such processes as they feel their class still needs.

 ●● Stimulate /activate background information before observing

 ●● Give complete attention to the observing task and demonstrate interest

 ●● Identify the signer’s purpose

 ●● Distinguish the message from the signer

 ●● Note the main and supporting ideas

 ●● Check understanding of the message by: making connections, making and confirming predictions, making
 inferences, evaluating and reflecting

 ●● Process information by: comparing, obeying instructions, filling in gaps, detecting differences, transferring
 information, sequencing, matching and interpreting meaning

 ●● Follow up on the presentation by: answering questions, categorizing ideas, summarising, paraphrasing,
 retelling, explaining, clarifying, reflecting and discussing

 ●● Consider the relationship between context and choice of signs and structure

 ●● Understand instructions, follow directions and trace on a map, and follow procedures

 Observe for critical analysis and evaluation

 After an observing activity, teachers usually provide opportunities for discussion. The following issues need to be
 considered in the discussion:

 15 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Make judgements and provide evidence

 • Make assumptions and predict consequences

 • Recognise and accept a wide range of different dialects of SASL and consider the appropriateness of the
 language of different age groups (e.g. slang)

Observing for appreciation

●● These observing activities are best practised in debates, small group discussions and any other structured
 discussion.

●● Respond to communication situations

●● Use turn-taking conventions

●● Ask questions to sustain communication

●● Reflect on the signing, gestures, eye contact and body language

●● Show understanding of the relationship between language and culture by showing respect for cultural
 conventions

●● Respond to the aesthetic qualities of signed texts, e.g. rhythm, pace, visual effects, imagery

Signing

The teaching of Signing should include knowledge of the process and communication strategies.

The signing process and strategies

The signing process consists of the following stages:

●● Planning, researching and organising

●● Presenting

Planning, researching and organising

Learners must be able to demonstrate planning, researching and organising skills for signed presentations by:

●● Using appropriate register and style according to the audience, purpose, context and theme

●● Choosing appropriate signs by using

 o verb types, a variety of adjectives and adverbs to give a specific impression, details and a vivid

 o description when signing e.g. a speech, a story, a debate

 o knowledge of synonyms and antonyms and classifiers

 o loan signs, native and new signs

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 16
 o figurative language (figures of speech), signing mode (emotional intention), mood or humour
 o appropriate fingerspelling
 o intensifiers of adjectives and adverbs
●● Demonstrating critical language awareness by:
 o Giving facts and expressing opinions
 o Expressing denotative and connotative meaning, implied meaning
 o Expressing their values and attitudes, biases, stereotypes and emotive, persuasive and manipulative
 o language e.g. in a persuasive speech

●● The use of resources and reference material e.g. SASL dictionaries to select effective and precise vocabulary
 and deliver presentations making use of notes and/or props, visual aids and graphs to enhance the appeal and
 accuracy of presentations.

Presenting

Learners must demonstrate signed presentation skills by:
●● Signing directly to the audience
●● Referring to relevant sources that have been consulted
●● Including a range of facts and examples according to the task requirements
●● Using an effective introduction and conclusion (e.g. by using literary quotations, references to authoritative
 sources, anecdotes)
●● Developing ideas and argument - content is original, creative, coherent, shows logical development and
 arrangement of facts, examples and ideas
●● Using features of presentations (e.g. introduction, transitions, body, conclusion) in formulating rational
 arguments and applying the art of persuasion and debate
●● Using organisational structures e.g. use of space to link ideas (including placement); chronological, topical,
 cause-effect, compare-contrast, problem-solution; to inform and to persuade
●● Presenting and advancing a clear argument and choosing appropriate types of proof (e.g. statistics, testimony,
 specific instances) that meet standard tests for evidence, including credibility, validity, and relevance
●● Using appropriate SASL structures and discourse conventions
●● Using techniques such as signing mode, signing size/modulation, pace / tempo, phrasing, eye contact, facial
 expressions, non-manual features, gestures and body language
●● Using fingerspelling appropriately

●● Engaging in activities that will help them to use an interpreter effectively in a variety of situations with an

 17 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • understanding of the code of ethics

Features and conventions of signed texts/communication activities

Observing and Signing

1. Stories/folklore

2. Prepared presentations

3. Unprepared presentations

4. Dialogues/ Informal discussions/conversations

5. Interviews

6. Directions

7. Instructions

8. Forum discussions

9. Debates

10. Reports (formal and informal)

11. Meetings and meeting procedures

12. Role-play

1. Stories

●● Identify and discuss the main message

●● Recall specific detail in the story

●● Discuss character, plot and setting

●● Share ideas and justify opinions

●● Ask and respond to challenging questions

●● Reflect on values and messages

●● “Re-tell” a story

●● Understand and use roleshift where necessary

●● Create and sign stories with a beginning, middle and ending, using descriptive sign language and showing
 elements of plot and characterisation

2. Prepared presentations

The teacher should introduce what the product of a formal presentation should be.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 18
 Present on events from e.g. television or findings from an interview

●● Plan and prepare

 οο Choose an appropriate research topic

 οο Conduct some form of research

 οο Choose what vocabulary, grammar and expressions might be used

 οο Plan an introduction, body and conclusion

●● Present

 οο Show clear logical links with topic

 οο Present an argument or point of view that triggers a thoughtful response in others

 οο Present clearly expressed ideas showing awareness of audience and purpose

 οο Present in a formal, neutral (informative) style

 οο Deliver in a suitable register for the audience

 οο Use appropriate body language

 οο Use visual aids, such as posters or overhead transparencies

 οο Use notes as needed

3. Unprepared presentations

●● Show some sense of structure

●● Remain on the topic

●● Keep presentation short but effective

●● Use register, signing mode and language appropriate to the audience and purpose

4. Dialogues/informal discussions/conversations

●● Initiate and sustain conversations

●● Follow turn taking conventions

●● Defend a position

●● ”Listen to” one another, negotiate

●● Fill in gaps and encourage the signer

●● Clarify issues

●● Share ideas and experiences

 19 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ●● Show understanding of concepts

5. Interviews

●● Plan and prepare: determine aim, background information, outline, questions, time, place, sequencing, physical
 environment

●● Use questioning, persuasion, summarising, observing skills

●● Using interviewing techniques in phases:

 o Introduction (identifying self; stating purpose)

 o Rapport (creating atmosphere of trust)

 o Questions (ask general to specific, relevant questions; uses mature, sensitive, respectful persuasive SASL;
 observe actively; evaluates response, respond effectively to demonstrate knowledge)

 o Summary (summarise; sequence and arrange responses and important details in logical order)

 o Closure (thank interviewee; provide contact details)

6. Directions

Use directions when telling someone how to get somewhere.

●● Use mostly the imperative form

●● Consider the following when giving directions:

 οο Use concise and clear sentences

 οο Use the chronological order

 οο Refer to a specific direction

 οο Indicate the approximate distance

 οο Give the approximate number of streets to be crossed to reach the destination

 οο Provide information about landmarks along the way

 οο Use signs indicating position

 οο Use signs indicating direction

When receiving directions:

 οο Ask for directions

 οο Request clarification

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 20
 οο Repeat directions for confirmation

 οο Show appreciation

7. Instructions

e.g. explain the working or use of any article in operation, e.g. follow recipes, repairing any faults, etc.

●● Plan and prepare

 οο Become familiar with the object or process

 οο Consider vocabulary, grammar, expressions, technical language and phrases that might be used

 οο Prepare clear and logical sequence of instructions

 οο Use visual material e.g. instruction manuals with illustrations

●● Sign the instructions

 (Reflecting the above planning and preparation)

8. Forum Discussions

Explore a range of ideas and experiences and show understanding of concepts.

The signer should:

 οο ”listen to” one another

 οο accept others’ points when necessary

 οο not interrupt other signers

 οο make logical links between points

 οο keep to the topic

 οο try to bring people into the discussion

 οο interrupt politely

 οο express opinions and give reasons

●● Each signer signs about a particular aspect of the topic

●● Duties of the chairperson are to:

 οο Keep order

 οο Manage time

 οο Keep to the agenda

 21 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 οο Encourage participation

 οο Remain neutral

 οο Call for proposal or votes

9. Debate:

●● Resolution: the statement which the two teams debate, e.g. Who rules in a democracy?

●● Rebuttal: explains why one team disagrees with the other team

●● The affirmative signers: agree with the resolution/proposition. They begin and end the debate

●● Negative signers: Disagree with the resolution by presenting a logical negative case

Ensure that:

●● Emotive and persuasive language is used

●● Opinions expressed are supported by using reliable source material

●● Arguments are well-balanced by expressing agreement and disagreement

Debate procedures

●● The topic and the first argument is stated by the first affirmative signer

●● The first argument is stated by the first negative signer

●● The second affirmative signer states the argument of his/her team

●● The second negative signer states the argument of his/her team

●● The affirmative and the negative teams are given a 5-10 minute break to prepare their rebuttal. Each team is
 obliged to refute their opponent’s arguments and to rebuild and defend their own case.

●● The negative team gives two rebuttals against the affirmative team’s two arguments and states their own two
 reasons

●● The affirmative team states two rebuttals against the negative team’s two arguments and states their own two
 reasons

10. Reports (formal and informal)

Give exact feedback of a situation, e.g. accident, any findings

●● Plan: Collect and organise information and give facts

●● Give a title, introduction (background, purpose and scope), body (Who? Why? Where? When? What? How?),
 conclusions, recommendations, references, signed appendices

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 22
 ●● Use semiformal to formal language register and style

●● Use

 οο Present tense (except historical reports)

 οο The third person (roleshifting as needed)

 οο Factual description

 οο Technical words and phrases

 οο Formal, impersonal language

11. Meetings and meeting procedures

 • Assign roles to members of the meeting

 • Follow correct meeting conventions

 • Use appropriate register and style

 • Give a summary report back of the meeting

12. Role-play

 • Role-play different situations

Length of text to be used for Observing and Signing:

 Texts Length of text (minutes)
 Informal discussions/ forum discussions 15 - 20
 Prepared presentations 3-5
 Unprepared presentations 2-3
 Conversations/dialogues 3-6
 Interviews 7 - 10
 Directions and instructions 2-4
 Stories/folklores 4–7
 Debates 12 – 15
 Reports (formal and informal) 3–5
 Meetings and meeting procedures 8 - 10
 Role-plays 3-5

 23 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 3.2 Visual Reading and Viewing

Note: Visual Reading and Viewing is done with recorded SASL material and not with live signing.

This component deals with the visual reading and viewing process and the strategies used for comprehending and
appreciating both literary and non-literary signed texts.

Visual reading instruction may involve three steps to enhance understanding of signed texts. Not every step of
the process will be used on every occasion. For example, if learners are reading an unfamiliar text type or genre,
they will need to do a “pre-reading” activity which alerts them to surface features of this text type, and helps
them make associations with their own experience. “Reading” activities would help them analyse its structure
and language features in more detail. “Post-reading” might involve learners in trying to reproduce the genre in a
signed text of their own.
Visual reading process

●● ”Pre-reading” activities

●● ”During reading” activities

●● ”Post- reading” activities

Techniques and strategies used during the visual reading process

“Pre-reading” activities

Learners may be prepared for the signed text in various ways depending on the type of signed text and the level
of the learner. “Pre-reading” activates associations and previous knowledge.

●● Learners are encouraged to form certain expectations about the signed text based on clues from accompanying
 pictures or photographs, DVD cover pages, root menu, title menu, tables of contents/DVD chapters, glossaries,
 signed appendices

●● Skim and scan signed text features: titles, headings and sub-headings, illustrations, graphs, charts, diagrams,
 maps, numbering, icons, pull down menus

●● Skim for main ideas and offer own ideas in a pre-reading discussion

●● Scan for supporting details

●● Predict

“During reading” activities

●● Infer meaning of unfamiliar signs and images by using contextual clues

●● Rereading / reviewing

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 24
 ●● Visualize

●● Deduce meaning (e.g. analogy, context, sign formation (parameters))

●● Question

●● Make notes (main and supporting ideas)

●● Summarize main and supporting ideas in point / paragraph form as per required length

●● Clarify issues

●● Explain / evaluate signer‘s inferences and conclusions

“Post-reading” activities

●● Draw conclusions / form own opinions

●● Evaluate/ discuss different interpretations of a signed text

●● Compare and contrast

●● Synthesize/ sign a summary

●● Exploit the signed text for grammar and vocabulary learning, e.g. re-sign in a different tense

●● Develop critical language awareness:

 οο fact and opinion

 οο direct and implied meaning

 οο denotation and connotation

 οο socio-political and cultural background of signed texts and author

 οο the effect of selections and omissions on meaning

 οο relationships between language and power

 οο emotive, persuasive and manipulative language, bias, prejudice, discrimination, stereotyping, signed
 language varieties, inferences, assumptions, arguments, purpose of including or excluding information

●● create new signed texts, i.e. change a narrative into a drama, dialogue

●● show awareness of and interpret signing mode, pace and language use

●● respond to and evaluate style, signing mode and register

●● understand the logical sequence of information

●● make judgments and provide supporting evidence

●● make assumptions and predict consequences

●● respond to language use, sign choice, language structure

 25 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Interpret visual texts (range of graphic and visual texts which includes SASL or other signed languages):

For many learners, the computer screen is the source of most of their information. Visual literacy is an important
area of study, and the computer screen a rich source of material. Examine how layout is key in a popular website;
how attention is gained by advertisers; how movement and colour play key roles in persuading the user to move
to other sites.

●● Persuasive techniques: Emotive language, persuasion, bias, manipulative language

●● How language and images reflect and shape values and attitudes

●● Impact of use of font types and sizes, headings and captions

●● Analyse, interpret, evaluate and respond to a range of cartoons/comic strips

Vocabulary development and language use

Knowledge of vocabulary items and language use should be introduced to the learners only as they appear in real
signed texts, both prose and poetry, fiction and non-fiction. For example, when working with figures of speech, it
is always more important to discuss why such figures have been used rather than merely identifying them. It is
always better to set a question like ‘Why has the author used anti-climax here?‘ than to ask ‘What figure of speech
is used here?‘

●● Figurative language and rhetorical devices: figures of speech (e.g. metaphor, personification, hyperbole,
 contrast, irony, wit, sarcasm, anti-climax, symbol, visual pun, understatement)

●● Use of dictionaries and other reference books/materials to determine the meaning and production of unfamiliar
 signs

●● Use surrounding textual context (e.g. in-sentence definitions) to determine the meaning of unfamiliar words

●● Demonstrate understanding of common phrases

●● Evaluate how signs from various cultural origins impact on text (e.g. ASL- and BSL based signs, slang, dialects,
 ethnic terms

●● Distinguish between commonly confused signs

●● Develop lists of synonyms and antonyms

●● Re-sign story or sentence using different signs (synonyms or antonyms)

●● Re-sign stories substituting synonyms and antonyms for original signs

●● Use one sign for a phrase

●● Use borrowed/loan and inherited signs, new signs

●● Use collocations correctly

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 26
 Sentence construction and the organisation of signed texts

Most of the items listed here will already have been studied in some form in previous phases. Teaching these
structural patterns often works better in the recording lessons when students have an opportunity to use them and
see their power directly, rather than having to ’identify‘ them in someone else‘s signed text.

●● Identify, explain and analyse the meaning and functions of language structures and conventions in signed texts:

 οο Transition: see “Chunking” under Recording and Presenting for examples

 οο Intensifiers of adjectives and adverbs

 οο Verbs forms and modals (e.g. can, can’t, should, will, must) to express mood accurately

 οο Negative forms

 οο Object, subject, and predicate

 οο Simple, compound, complex, compound-complex sentences by using clauses, phrases and conjunctions

 οο Direct and indirect dialogue and constructed action (roleshift)

 οο Correct sign order

 οο Placement of objects/people in relation to each other

 οο Classifiers

●● Analyse the structure / organisation of signed texts that are used across the curriculum and related terminology:
 chronological / sequential order, explanation, cause and effect, procedure, compare/contrast, order of
 importance, spatial order, choice paragraph, classification paragraph, description paragraph, evaluation
 paragraph, definition paragraph, expositions, concluding paragraph.

(In addition see chunking for examples of transition signs.)

Features of signed literary texts

Authors have only their signed text to reveal their thoughts. Good signers are particularly sensitive to the subtlety
and variety of SASL, even in its simplest forms. While it is important that literary features and their construction,
and their impact, are studied, it is more important to understand the impact of the features on the message and
the message the author intends to convey to the audience.

Poetry

The following aspects will enhance understanding of the intended message:

●● literal meaning

 27 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ●● figurative meaning

●● theme and message

●● imagery

●● internal structure of a poem, figures of speech, sign choice, neologisms, signing mode (emotional intention),
 emotional responses, rhetorical devices

●● external structure of a poem, lines, signs, stanzas, links, rhyme, rhythm, eye gaze, pausing, refrain, repetition,
 alliteration (repetition of parameters), symmetry (vertical, horizontal)

●● analyse and discuss the five parameters in different sign utterances and how they impact on the meaning.

Drama

The following aspects will enhance the learners‘ understanding of the text:

●● dramatic structure: plot and sub-plot (exposition, rising action, conflict, climax, falling action/ anticlimax,
 denouement/resolution, foreshadowing and flashback)

●● characterisation

●● role of narrator/persona/ point of view

●● theme and messages

●● background and setting – relation to character and theme

●● mood and tone

●● ironic twist/ending

●● stage directions

●● link between dialogue /monologue/soliloquy and action

●● dramatic irony

●● time line

Longer stories/Short stories/Folklore

The following aspects will enhance the learners‘ understanding of the text:

●● plot, subplot (exposition, rising action, conflict, climax, falling action/anticlimax, resolution, foreshadowing and
 flashback)

●● characterisation

●● role of narrator

●● messages and themes

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 28
 ●● background, setting and how these relate to character and theme

●● mood, ironic twist / ending

Length of texts to be used/”read”:

 Texts Number of Length of text (minutes)
 texts
 Poetry minimum 10 1-3
 Dramas minimum 1 5 - 10
 Short stories/folklores minimum 5 3-8
 Longer stories minimum 1 8 - 12
 Non-fiction minimum 3 5-8

 29 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 3.3 Recording: process, content, strategies and signed texts
Good recording skills need to be developed and supported. Although visual reading is an important source of input,
it is only through presenting that presenting skills are developed. The recording process consists of the following:

●● Planning / Pre-recording

●● Drafting (recording)

●● Revising

●● Editing

●● Final recording

●● Publishing

During the recording and presenting process learners should do the following:

Planning/ Pre-recording

●● Decide on the purpose and audience of a signed text to be presented and/or designed

●● Determine the requirements of format, style, point of view

●● Brainstorm ideas using e.g. mind maps, spider diagrams, flow charts or lists using sign language notation,
 SignWriting, glossing or any written language

●● Consult relevant sources, select relevant information

Drafting (recording)

●● Use main and supporting ideas effectively from the planning process

●● Produce a first draft which takes into account purpose, audience, topic and genre

●● View draft critically and get feedback from others (classmates)

●● Determine sign choice by using appropriate, descriptive and evocative signs, phrases and expressions to make
 the signing clear

●● Establish an identifiable voice and style by adapting language and signing mode to suit the audience and
 purpose for presenting

●● Show own point of view by explaining values, beliefs and experiences

●● Include specific details of the required signed text (use of quotations (roleshift), substantiating and motivating
 the argument)

Revising, editing, final recording

●● Use set criteria for overall evaluation of own and others‘ work for improvement

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 30
 ●● Refine sign choice, sentence and paragraph structure (insert additional information, use appropriate transition
 signs)

●● Eliminate ambiguity, verbosity, redundancy, slang and offensive language

●● Evaluate content, style and register

●● Use eye gaze, pausing, fingerspelling and grammar correctly and appropriately

●● Prepare the final draft (recording)

Publishing

‘Publish’ (make public ) own recording:

●● Share work with others by showing the recording in the classroom

●● Introduce the recorded text to the audience

●● Share recording with intended audience, such as family or friends

●● Make own DVDs or contribute to class anthologies and/or SASL recordings

●● Upload to social media platforms e.g. YouTube

Language structures and conventions during the recording and presenting process
(Phonology, morphology, semantics, syntax, discourse)

Sign choice

●● Use a variety of verb types, adjectives and adverbs to give a specific impression, details and vivid descriptions

●● when presenting for example a narrative essay, descriptive essay

●● Use appropriate synonyms, antonyms and classifiers to express concepts

●● Use formal and informal language (slang/colloquialism, jargon) appropriately

●● Use loan signs and native signs appropriately

●● Give facts and express opinions

●● Express denotative, connotative and/or implied/contextual meaning

●● Position themselves as authors through implicit and explicit messages

●● Express themselves on values, attitudes, bias, stereotypes, emotive language, persuasive and manipulative
 language e.g. in persuasive texts such as argumentative essays

●● Show respect by using appropriate signs when presenting signed texts such as dialogue, interviews

●● Use resources and reference materials e.g. SASL dictionaries, to select appropriate vocabulary

 31 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Sentence construction

●● Use different types of sentences, e.g. statements, questions, simple, compound, complex, compound-complex
 sentences

●● Sign sentences of various lengths

●● Use parts of speech appropriately

●● Use object, subject, verb, tense, temporal aspect, affirmatives, negations, modals, direct and indirect dialogue
 and constructed action (roleshift), non-manual features

●● Use conjunctions, pronouns, adverbs and transitional signs to create cohesive sentences

●● Use different types of pronouns and classifiers (proforms) to show focus and emphasis

●● Use appropriate sign order in sentences to demonstrate interest and emphasis (topicalisation)

Chunking (Paragraph “writing”)

Present different parts of a chunk: topic sentence, supporting and main ideas, an effective introduction, body and
conclusion and a closing sentence

●● Present different chunks and signed texts using transition signs and phrases such as:

 o Chronological /sequential order: first, second, third, before, after, when, later, until, at last, next, recently,
 previously, afterwards

 o Explanation/Cause and effect: e.g. MEAN WHAT, WHY, THEREFORE, IX FROM IX, if … then (NMF)

 o Procedure: first, second, third

 o Compare/contrast: similar, different, smaller than, bigger than, however, but

 o Order of importance: always, finally

 o Spatial order: above, below, left, right, forward, back

 o Generalisations: NORMAL, CONCLUSION

 o Choice paragraph: in my opinion, belief, idea, understanding, I think that, I consider, I believe, it seems to
 me, I prefer/ like/dislike/hope/feel

 o Classification paragraph: is a kind of, can be divided into, is a type of, falls under, belongs to, is a

 o part of, fits into, is grouped with, is related to, is associated with

 o Description paragraph: above, below, beside, near, north/east/south/west, size, colour, shape, purpose,
 length, width, mass/weight, speed, is like, resembles

 o Evaluation paragraph: good/bad, correct/incorrect, moral/immoral, right/wrong, important/trivial, suggest,
 recommend, advise, argue

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 32
 o Definition paragraph: is defined as, is a kind of paragraph that defines an idea objectively

 o Concluding paragraph: to conclude, to sum up, in summary, in short, as you can see

Register, style and voice

●● Use appropriate register: formal, informal e.g. using informal/conversational style and first person versus formal
 language in official communication

●● Use figurative language (figures of speech), signing mode (emotional intention), mood or humour appropriately

●● Show passion towards message

●● Use different points of view/perspective

Features of signed texts produced

1. Narrative essays

2. Descriptive essays

3. Argumentative, discursive and reflective essays

4. Literary essays

5. Poems

6. “Speeches”

7. Roleshift (dialogues and interviews) – one signer

8. Dialogues – two or more signers

9. Reports (formal and informal)

10. Reviews

11. Diary entries (vlog)

12. Directions

13. Instructions

14. Advertisements

15. Summaries

16. Social media messages

 33 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 1. Narrative essays

A narrative essay is largely the presentation of a series of events in some meaningful order. The following are
possible features of a narrative essay:

●● Depict a story /a past event / fiction

●● Use a story line that is convincing

●● Establish a time frame (i.e. past, present, future) and mark time changes when needed

●● Use a captivating introductory paragraph

●● Reflect a point to be made

●● Use an interesting ending

●● Ensure sustained interest with style, rhetorical device and action

●● Highlight sensory details

●● Use descriptive elements

For enrichment: Expository essays

●● Communicate ideas or information in a logical way

●● Explain ideas or give facts in a systematic way

●● Research ideas and support with evidence

●● Clarify any unfamiliar concepts

●● Take the viewer from the known to the unknown

●● Present generally in the present tense

2. Descriptive essays

Description is both practical and ornamental. Both require clean, simple language. Draw learners away from signing
that is overly descriptive. Study descriptive passages from good presenters: many use hardly any adjectives to
create descriptions that work exceptionally well. Have learners imitate such passages by continuing the description
from where you have cut the passage. The practical description is less interesting, but socially more important:
describing simple things accurately, for example, a stapler, a cell phone. Or describing people from pictures or
photographs provided. Description is used often more to create atmosphere and mood than picture: films do this
visually, presenters do this with signs, where the choice of signs is more determined by their connotations than by
the accuracy of their denotative use.

●● Describe someone / something to allow viewer to experience the topic vividly

●● Create a picture in signs using classifiers

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 34
 ●● Choose signs and expressions carefully to achieve the desired effect

●● Use images of sight, taste, smell and touch

●● Use figures of speech

3. Argumentative, discursive and reflective essays

Argumentative essays present an argument for or against something (‘why I believe that women are stronger than
men‘); discursive essays present a balanced argument for and against something the topic addresses, with the
presenter‘s view only reflected in the conclusion (‘Are women stronger than men? Yes and no, but I‘m settling for
yes‘); reflective essays present a set of thoughts and ideas about a topic, with no particular attempt to argue for or
against anything (‘the modern woman: my thoughts‘).

●● Argumentative essays tend to be subjectively argued; the defence or attack is consistent and as well argued as
 possible, but it will inevitably be one-sided; the conclusion clearly states where the presenter stands and why.

 o Show a specific opinion or viewpoint and argue to defend or motivate a position

 o Sustain view clearly throughout

 o Try to convince the viewer to share his or her point of view subjectively

 o Start with the presenter‘s view of the topic in an original and striking way

 o Give a range of arguments to support and substantiate view

 o Focus on points for OR against a statement

 o Express subjective and strong opinions

 o Use a variety of rhetorical devices and persuasive techniques

 o Use emotive language

 o Conclude with a strong, clear and convincing statement reflecting the presenter‘s opinion

●● Discursive essays tend to be more balanced, and present various sides of a particular argument; the structure
 is carefully and clearly planned; the tendency is towards objectivity, but the presenter can be personal; while
 emotive language is possible, the best arguments here are won because they make good, reasonable sense.
 The conclusion leaves the viewer in no doubt where the presenter stands.

 o Aim to give an objective and balanced view of both sides of an argument

 o Consider various aspects of the topic under discussion

 o Present opposing views impartially

 o Balance the arguments for and against

 o Signing must be lucid, rational and objective

 35 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 o Make well-reasoned and well-supported statements

 o Use an unemotional and convincing signing mode without being condescending

 o Conclude with an indication of particular opinion

●● Reflective essays present the presenter‘s views, ideas, thoughts and feelings on a particular topic, usually
 something they feel strongly about. It tends to be personal rather than subjective; it needs a careful structure,
 but does not have to present a clear conclusion. Nor does it have to present a balanced discussion, although
 it might. It can be witty or serious.

 o Contemplate an idea

 o Give emotional reactions and feelings.

 o Reflect subjectivity where feelings and emotions play a major role

 o Aim to recreate recollections or feelings of the presenter in the viewer

 o Express ideas, thoughts or feelings revealing sincerity and personal involvement

4. Literary essays

These essays present the presenter‘s response to a literary signed text that is interpretative, evaluative, reflective,
even on occasion personal. Arguments are presented and supported or illustrated by reference to the signed text;
the language of the signed text may be explored and shown to possess particular linguistic or literary qualities. The
style is formal, but not necessarily dryly objective. Personal responses are possible in some essays, especially
when asked for.

●● Advance a judgement that is interpretative, analytical, evaluative or reflective

●● Support key ideas and viewpoints with accurate and detailed references to the text or to other works and
 authors

●● Analyse the presenter‘s style of using stylistic devices and express an appreciation of the effects the devices
 create

●● Discuss briefly:

 o The genre

 o The setting

 o Characterisation

 o Style of presenting

 o The atmosphere

 o The plot – only the outline of the story

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 36
 o Conclusion and suitability

 o Your judgement and rating

●● Identify and assess the impact of possible ambiguities, nuances, and complexities within texts

●● Anticipate and answer viewer’s questions, counterclaims

5. Poems

●● Produce poems

●● Convey theme and message

●● Use appropriate poetic devices relating to internal and external structures, e.g. symmetry, alliteration (repetition
 of parameters), rhythm, imagery, pace, sign size, figures of speech, neologisms, signing mode (emotional
 intention), eye gaze, pausing

●● Use appropriate SASL discourse conventions

6. “Speeches”

●● Adapt the style to be used: when, where, why (purpose), who (audience) and what (content)

●● Capture attention of the audience with an introduction

●● Develop points well and avoid clichés

●● Decide where to pause and where to use gestures (naturally) and for what purpose. (Keep eye-contact.)

●● Use contrasting signing modes

●● Use short sentences with simple ideas, using familiar examples

●● Balance criticisms with reasonable alternatives

●● Consider the closing. Leave the audience with a thought (or two)

●● Use visual or physical aids

●● Use of notes is optional, and only for reference

●● Use language that expresses maturity, values and background

7. Roleshift (dialogues and interviews – one signer)

 Dialogues

●● Outline a scenario before signing

●● Introduce and place the characters

●● Use roleshift appropriately

 37 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ●● Reflect a conversation between two or more people

●● Present exchanges as they occur, directly from the signer‘s point of view

 Interviews

●● Introduce and place the interviewee and interviewer

●● Use roleshift to represent the interview

●● Probe the interviewee by asking questions

●● Portray the interviewee‘s strong points, talents, weak points

8. Dialogue (two or more signers)

●● Initiate the conversation

●● Maintain topic

●● Follow turn-taking rules

●● Use SASL conventions appropriately including eye contact, register, style

●● Conclude the dialogue

9. Reports

Reports are formal documents and work best when what is examined is real and important to the learners. Give
exact feedback of a situation, e.g. accident, any findings.

●● Plan: collect and organise information; sign facts

●● Give a title, introduction (background, purpose and scope), body (Who? Why? Where? When? What? How?),
 conclusions, recommendations, references, appendices

●● Use semiformal to formal language register and style

●● Use

 o Present tense (except historical reports)

 o The third person (roleshifting as needed)

 o Factual description

 o Technical words and phrases

 o Formal, impersonal language

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 38
 10. Reviews

Reviews seldom follow a set pattern. These do not have to cover any specific aspects of the signed text, film or
DVD. Generally, reviewers establish what it is they are reviewing and who is involved. Good reviews attempt to
be fair but honest. Humour is not uncommon in reviews. Present reviews from different sources to show learners
how varied this form can be.

●● Reflect an individual’s response to a work of art, film, signed text or occasion

●● Project his/her ‘judgement’ on the work presented

●● The viewer of the review does not have to agree with the reviewer

●● Two reviewers may respond differently to the same text

●● Give relevant facts, for example, the name of the author/producer/artist, the title of the signed text/work, the
 name of the publisher/production company, as well as the price (where applicable)

11. Diary entries (vlog)

●● A diary is a portrayal of daily events

●● Present his/her evaluation of the day or event

●● Record from the signer‘s point of view

●● The language choice is simple and to the point

●● The signing mode will be determined by the nature of the entry

12. Giving directions

Use directions when telling someone how to get somewhere.

●● Use mostly the imperative form (commands).

●● Although the subject ‘you’ is not stated, it always refers to the second person representing an interaction
 between the signer and the observer.

●● Consider the following when giving directions:

 o Be concise and clear

 o The directions must be in chronological order

 o Always refer to a specific direction

 o Indicate the approximate distance

 o Give the approximate number of streets to be crossed to reach the destination

 o Provide information about landmarks along the way

 39 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 o Use signs indicating position

 o Use signs indicating direction

13. Giving instructions

Give instructions when describing how something is done.

●● Instructions must be in chronological order

14. Advertisements

●● Keep the attention of the viewer – ensuring that the important signs stand out.

●● Create a desire to own the product or use the service.

●● Consider the following in designing:

 o The target market (for whom the advertisement is intended)

 o Positioning (where and when the advertisement will appear – in what media, at what time and where in the
 programme?)

 o Appeals (to what sense is the advertisement appealing?)

 o The structure

 o The attitude (sincere or not) and the ratio between fact and opinion

 o The effectiveness of the choice of colour or lack thereof

 o The language used (whether it is clichéd, repetitive, figurative or rhetorical)

15. Summaries

 • In point form or chunks

 • Include all important information

 • Avoid unnecessary detail

 • Be precise

16. Social media messages

These are the signed equivalent of written letters (transactional texts)

●● Friend / family member

●● Businesses: requests, applications, qualifications (CV), complaints

●● Announcements: birth, marriage, deaths

●● Invitations

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 40
 Length of recorded texts to be produced:

 Texts Length of text (minutes)
Narrative essays 2-4
Descriptive essays 2-3
Argumentative, discursive, reflective essays 2-3
Literary essays 2-4
Poems 1-3
“Speeches” 1-2
Roleshift (dialogues and interviews) – one signer 2-4
Dialogues – two or more signers 2-4
Reports (formal and informal) 3-4
Reviews 2-3
Diary entries (vlog) 1
Directions and instructions 2-3
Advertisements 1-2
Summaries 1-2
Social media messages 1-3

 41 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 3.4 Language structures and conventions

The table below shows the language structures and conventions that learners are expected to learn during the
observing, signing, visual reading, viewing, recording and presenting processes. These structures should be taught
in context in an integrated manner using different types of signed and visual texts. They should be taught explicitly
with time set aside as required.

 Language structures Types
 Phonology Parts of signs

 ●● Parameters (handshape, orientation, location, movement and NMF)

 Type of signs

 ●● Free space, no contact (1 hand)

 ●● Any place on body, not opposite hand (1 hand)

 ●● Both hands active; identical motor acts (2 hands)

 ●● One hand active, one hand passive; same HS (2 hands)

 ●● One hand active, one hand passive; different HS (2 hands)

 ●● Compounds (combine some of the above (2 hands)

 ●● Non-manual signs (articulated on the face only)

 ●● Minimal pairs:

 οο Stokoe principles (2 signs that differ only with one parameter) - simultaneous

 οο Movement-hold model - Liddell and Johnson - sequential

 ●● Phonological processes

 οο Movement epenthesis (inserting a movement between 2 signs)

 οο Hold deletion/reduction (deleting or shortening a hold)

 οο Metathesis (reversing the internal order of the sign), e.g. ASL sign for DEAF
 – ear to chin, chin to ear

 οο Assimilation (2 signs have different handshape, but the handshape of one
 of the signs influence the handshape of the other sign), e.g. ASL sign for I
 KNOW

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 42
 Morphology Morpheme (smallest meaningful unit in a language), e.g. SASL – 2 people
 walking (2 morphemes)

 ●● Morphological process

 οο Noun-verb pairs (segmental structure), e.g. SASL – BROOM SWEEP

 οο Compounds, e.g. ASL – good night; SASL - mother father – parent)

 ●● Plural (e.g. classifiers; repeating the noun/reduplication; adjective)

 ●● Lexicalised fingerspelling (signs made up from fingerspelled words), e.g. DO

 ●● Numeral incorporation (sign changes to incorporate numbers)

 ●● Predicates

 • Temporal aspect (from AUSLAN, BSL and ASL)

 οο Simple/punctual

 -- Repetitive/iterative

 -- Habitual

 οο Durative

 -- Durational

 -- Continuative

 • Verbs

 o Function of space (agreement)

 οο Plain verbs (one location)

 οο Indicating verbs (agreement/directional verbs) (move towards people,
 objects - involve orientation and location) locative verbs – where the
 location has meaning (e.g. throw a ball)

 οο Transitive and intransitive verbs

 οο Classifiers - combining movement with handshape

 ●● Derivational morphology (using an existing form to create a new form; e.g.
 noun-verb pairs, compounding; numeral incorporation; classifier predicates;
 intensification of adjectives and verbs)

 ●● Inflectional morphology (process of adding grammatical information to units
 that already exist, e.g. aspect and indicating verbs)

 43 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Syntax Major sign categories (lexical) (parts of speech)

 ●● Nouns

 ●● Predicates (say something about the subject of a sentence; may be nouns,
 verbs or adjectives)

 ●● Adjectives are placed after a noun in SASL

 ●● Adverbs

 οο of time

 οο of manner

 οο of location

 οο of intensification
 Minor sign categories (functional) (parts of speech)

 ●● Determiners

 ●● Modals

 ●● Prepositions

 οο Basic prepositions

 οο Classifiers

 ●● Conjunctions

 ●● Pronouns (placement and indexing)
 Basic sentence types (sign order)

 ●● Statements

 ●● Questions

 οο Yes-no

 οο Wh

 οο Question mark wiggle

 οο Rhetorical

 ●● Negation (manual and non-manual)

 ●● Commands

 ●● Topicalisation

 ●● Conditionals (complex)

 ●● Compound sentences

 ●● Tense – marked by separate lexical items, e.g. LAST NIGHT

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 44
 Semantics (meaning of ●● Sign meaning
signs)
 οο concrete nouns

 οο abstract nouns

 οο synonyms

 οο antonyms, contrast

 οο paronyms (signs derived from foreign languages - lexicalised fingerspelled
 loan signs and others)

 οο iconicity e.g. vibration, lights flashing, caterpillar movement (see
 onomatopoeia)

 οο polysemes (one sign with many related meanings – e.g. road vs way)

 οο homonyms (same sign with unrelated meanings – e.g. use vs men; often
 from different regional dialects)

 οο new signs (neologisms) and etymology (origin of signs)

 ●● Sentence/Utterance meaning

 οο Figures of speech

 -- Simile

 οο Metaphor/symbol (iconicity – movements up is good, down is bad; chest as
 container – things inside chest is invisible but can be taken out to examine/
 discuss it)

 οο Personification (when an object becomes a person)

 οο Idioms (e.g. JAW-DROP; EYE-POP-OUT)

 οο Hyperbole (means exaggeration; use of signing space, non-manual
 features, repetition)

 οο Euphemism (less visually motivated: finger-cheek for pregnant rather than
 showing belly)

 οο Synecdoche (a part used to represent the whole; e.g. signed trunk refer to
 elephant)

 οο Metonymy (something associated with the concept is used for that concept
 e.g. the sign ring for marriage)

 οο Contrast (use of space)

 οο Paradox (apparent contradiction)

 οο Irony

 οο Sarcasm
 οο Anti-climax

 45 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Discourse ●● Register, style and genre

 ●● Register variations: formal (e.g. lecture) versus informal (e.g. story) signing

 ●● Cohesion (sign posting or referring words; role of repetition; discourse markers/
 transition signs) and coherence (establishing and maintaining topics)

 ●● Roleshift (constructed action) – links to cohesion and coherence

 ●● Chunking (paragraphing): ways of dividing up signed text

 ●● Rhetorical statements, questions and commands
 Two kinds of signed texts:

 ●● Monologue (one person signing)

 οο Prepared presentations

 οο Unprepared presentations

 οο Roleshift/dialogue

 οο Roleshift/interview

 οο Forum discussions

 οο Debates

 οο Reports (formal and informal)

 οο Poems

 οο “Speeches”

 οο Review

 οο Diary entry (vlog)

 οο Narrative essay

 οο Descriptive essay

 οο Argumentative, discursive and reflective essays

 οο Literary essay

 οο Advertisements

 ●● Dialogue (two or more people involved in a conversation)

 οο Directions

 οο Instructions

 οο Informal discussions/ conversations

 οο Dialogues

 οο Interviews

 οο Advertisements

 οο Dramas

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 46
 Fingerspelling • Neutral fingerspelling -- Commonly ﬁngerspelled English words, such as
 proper nouns (e.g., names of people, cities, companies, brand names, and
 technical terms).

 • Lexicalized fingerspelling - ﬁngerspelled words are altered or lexicalized to
 become more sign-like – SASL sign for DO.

 • Initialized signs - An initialized sign uses the handshape that corresponds to
 the ﬁrst letter of a written word (e.g., UNCLE). Some common initialized signs
 are items in a category, such as family members.

 47 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 RECOMMENDED TEXTS/RESOURCES FOR THE PHASE

Classroom resources

 • Digital cameras / video recorders / tripods

 • Memory cards / flash drives

 • TV monitors and DVD players

 • Computers / software for editing

 • A range of DVDs to accommodate different reading levels

 • OPTIONAL: Webcam facilities / broadband internet access / smart-board / tablets / smart phone with video
 recording and viewing capabilities

●● Multimedia texts for entertainment:

 οο magazine items

 οο news items

 οο advertisements

 οο films

 οο photographs / pictures

 οο illustrations

 οο films

 οο TV programmes

 οο cartoons

 οο comic strips

 οο Deaf jokes

●● Multimedia texts for information / Non-fiction texts:

 οο Charts and maps

 οο Graphs, tables and pie charts

 οο Mind maps and diagrams

 οο Posters

 οο Signs and symbols

 οο TV documentaries

 οο reports e.g. investigative

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 48
 ●● Transactional and creative texts:

 οο debates

 οο forum/group/panel discussions

 οο dialogues

 οο interviews / investigations

 οο diaries

 οο Web pages, vlogs

 οο Social media messages

 οο Comments to the press

 οο Signed summary

 οο Invitation /reply

 οο Negotiations

 οο Meeting procedures

●● Reference and informational texts:

 οο prepared “speeches”/presentations

 οο reports

 οο reviews

 οο instructions

 οο procedures

 οο directions

 οο summaries

●● Texts for enrichment:

 οο films

 οο TV series

 οο documentaries

 οο essays

 οο biographies

 οο autobiographies

 49 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 οο folktales

 οο myths

 οο legends

●● Literary texts

 οο folklore / longer stories

 οο short stories

 οο narrative chunks

 οο dramas

 οο poetry

●● Deaf television programmes (e.g. DTV, SABC programmes, Zwakala)

●● Narrative / descriptive / reflective / argumentative / discursive essays

●● Sign language dictionary

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 50
 3.5 TEACHING PLANS

 Grade 7

 51
 Term Observing and Signing
 and
 Week Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Language Structures & Conventions

 Term 1
 1-3 Observe a short signed story/folklore “Read” short stories/ folklore Record a narrative chunk Phonology:

 “Retell” a story Descriptive essay Parameters

 Type of signs
 Group/panel discussion
 Minimal pairs:

 Stokoe principle
 4-6 Group / class discussion on how to give “Read” poems Record own poem Morphology:
 and follow instructions or directions
 Classifiers

 Syntax/Semantics:

 Abstract nouns

 Determiners

 Figures of speech: simile, metaphor, personi-
 fication, idioms, hyperbole, contrast, euphe-
 mism
 7–9 Conversation / Dialogue “Read” drama (one act plays) Record a dialogue Syntax/Semantics:

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 “Read” poems Record a review Basic sentence types:

 Statements, negations, questions, com-
 mands, topicalisation, conditionals, com-
 pound
 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:

 • Short story • Short stories • Publish recorded text • Classifiers

 • Instructions and directions • Poems or Drama • Figures of speech
 Term 2
 1-3 Observe and discuss a story “Read” longer story and Record a narrative essay Morphology:

 Classifiers

CAPS
 comprehension activity
 Investigation/interview

 Syntax/Semantics:

 Prepositions

 Discourse:

 Cohesion and coherence

 Chunking

 4-6 Debate “Read” signed/ visual texts, e.g. adver- Record transactional texts: adver- Syntax/ Semantics:
 tisement tisements and instructions
 Adjectives, synonyms, antonyms, paronyms,
 iconicity
 Group /class discussion on instructions
 and procedures “Read” an instructional text like instruc- Discourse:
 tional procedures
 Cohesion and coherence
 7–9 Role play “Read” a drama Drama review Syntax/ Semantics:

 Abstract nouns

 Prepared/unprepared presentation “Read” poems Determiners

 Figures of speech: simile, metaphor, personi-
 fication, idioms, hyperbole, contrast, euphe-
 mism
 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9
 52
 Term 3
 1-3 Observe a signed news report “Read” a non-fiction text e.g. news/ Record non-fiction text Morphology:

 53
 magazine items, directions, instructions,
 speeches Verbs: Indicating verbs; plain verbs; transitive
 and intransitive verbs;
 Forum/ panel discussion
 Function of space
 Non-fiction comprehension activity

 4-6 Observe and role-play a dialogue, “Read” a longer story/short stories/drama Record a dialogue/interview Discourse:
 interview
 Roleshift

 “Read” poems Record narrative/descriptive essay
 Role-play meeting procedures
 7–9 Debate “Read” informational texts, e.g. directions Record diary entry (vlog) Syntax/ Semantics:

 Adjectives

 Information text – directions Record directions Pronouns (placement and indexing)

 Paronyms, iconicity

 Modals

 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:

 • Role-play • Non-fiction text • Publish recorded text • Roleshift
 • Directions • Comprehension activities • Verbs

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Term 4
 1-3 Unprepared presentation: “telling” a “Read” a longer story / short story / drama Record directions Morphology:
 story
 Predicates:

CAPS
 Record a narrative essay Temporal aspects: simple/punctual – repeti-
 Prepared presentation tive/ iterative, habitual

 Syntax/ Semantics:

 Tense
 4-6 Debate/Group discussion on use of “Read” a text with diary entries (vlog) Record a diary entry (vlog) Syntax/ Semantics:
 electronic communication media
 “Read” poems Record own poem Adverbs of time, manner, location, intensifica-
 tion

 Figures of speech: simile, metaphor, personi-
 fication, idioms, hyperbole, contrast, euphe-
 mism
 7–8 Revision of texts – in preparation of Revision and preparation for examination Revision and preparation for examina- Revision and preparation for examination
 exam tion
 9 - 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9
 54
 Grade 8
 Term and Observing and Signing
 Week

 55
 Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Language Structures & Conventions

 Term 1
 1-3 Interview/ report “Read” short stories Record an investigative report Phonology:
 Parameters
 Group discussion
 Type of signs
 “Read” an investigative report
 Minimal pairs: Stokoe principle
 4-6 Observe a prepared “speech”, e.g. “Read” a presentation/ “speech” and com- Record a “speech” Morphology:
 presentation by president, influen- prehension activity
 Classifiers
 tial member of society
 Syntax/Semantics:
 Record social media messages
 “Read” poems (friendly / informal “letters”) based on Abstract nouns
 Prepared presentation visual stimulus Determiners
 Figures of speech: simile, metaphor, person-
 ification, idioms, hyperbole, contrast, euphe-
 mism, synecdoche, metonymy, paradox
 7–9 Group/forum discussion about “Read” a longer story/ drama Record a narrative/reflective essay Syntax/Semantics:
 visual/ multimedia text
 Basic sentence types:
 Unprepared presentation on a Statements, negations, questions, com-
 news or magazine item “Read” news or magazine items mands, topicalisation, conditionals, compound
 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:

 • Observe and give a prepared • “Read” poems • Publish recorded text • Figures of speech
 “speech”
 • “Read” an investigative report

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Term 2
 1-3 Observe, follow and give in- “Read” information text with visuals Record an instruction text, e.g. direc- Morphology:
 structions/ directions tions / instructions
 Classifiers

CAPS
 “Read” poems Syntax/Semantics:
 Unprepared news presentation/ Record news presentation/ ”speech”
 ”speech” Prepositions
 4-6 Observe non-fiction text, e.g. “Read” a longer story/short story Record a review of a short story / Syntax/ Semantics:
 signed news item longer story
 Adjectives
 Debate
 Synonyms, antonyms, paronyms, iconicity,
 polysemes, homonyms

 Discourse:

 Cohesion and coherence

 Chunking

 7–9 Interview “Read” a drama/play and comprehension Record an interview Syntax/ Semantics:
 activity
 Figures of speech: simile, metaphor, personi-
 fication, idioms, hyperbole, contrast, euphe-
 Dialogue Record a dialogue mism, synecdoche, metonymy, paradox
 “Read” poems

 Forum / panel discussion
 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9
 56
 Term 3

 1-3 Observe and participate in a “Read” a drama/play and comprehension Record a dialogue / review Discourse:

 57
 dialogue activity
 Roleshift

 Record a descriptive essay
 Prepared presentation “Read” poems

 4-6 Observe a signed comment to the “Read” news/magazine items about cur- Record a signed comment to the Morphology:
 press rent/social issues (argumentative text) press
 Verbs: Indicating verbs; plain verbs; transitive
 and intransitive verbs;

 Group discussion Record an argumentative essay Function of space

 7–9 Observe a short story “Read” a longer story/short story and Record own short story Syntax/ Semantics:
 comprehension activity
 Adjectives

 Group discussion about story “tell- Record social media messages Adverbs
 ing” “Read” poems (friendly / informal “letters”)
 Pronouns (placement and indexing)

 Unprepared fiction presentation
 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:

 • Story “telling” • “Read” argumentative texts • Publish recorded text • Roleshift
 • Observe a signed comment to • Verbs
 the press

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Term 4

 1-3 Conversation – discussion based “Read” a non-fiction text, e.g. Deaf history Record a non-fiction text Syntax/ Semantics:
 on a non-fiction text, e.g. Deaf

CAPS
 history Adverbs of time, manner, location, intensifica-
 tion
 “Read” a signed summary Record a point form summary
 Modals

 4-6 Debate “Read” a longer story/short story/drama/ Record a report Morphology:
 play and comprehension activity
 Predicates:

 Group discussion Record a diary entry Temporal aspects: simple/punctual – repeti-
 “Read” poems tive/ iterative, habitual

 Syntax/ Semantics:

 Tense
 7–8 Prepare for examination Prepare for examination Prepare for examination Prepare for examination
 9 - 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9
 58
 BRIDGING GRADE 9 and 10

 The CAPS for SASL Grade 9 will be implemented simultaneously with SASL in the Foundation Phase. A Bridging SASL Grades 9 and 10 Programme has been

 59
 developed in order to introduce the subject into the FET Phase. The Bridging Programme has been developed since SASL is a new language/subject in the overall
 curriculum and it would therefore not be appropriate and feasible to rollout the subject in grades 10-12 without prior knowledge and exposure to the language/subject.
 The interim plan is for all schools to implement the Bridging Grade 9 Programme which aims to fast track learners to a grade 9 level in SASL until such time that SASL
 is formally taught in all the Senior Phase grades according to the official implementation plan. This will assist learners to accomplish the language/subject requirements
 and succeed with SASL as a subject in the FET Phase.

 Grade 9
 Term and Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Language Structures & Conventions
 Week
 Term 1

 1-3 Observe a story Comprehension activity on visual texts, Record an advertisement Phonology:
 e.g. advertisement
 Parameters
 Group discussion/ conversation Record a narrative essay Type of signs
 “Read” a longer story/short story/drama
 Minimal pairs:
 Stokoe principle and
 Movement–hold (Liddell and Johnson)
 4-6 Observe a signed text, e.g. news “Read” a news/magazine report and Record a report/interview Morphology:
 report comprehension activity
 Record a social media message Classifiers
 (“letter”) of appreciation for help/ Syntax/Semantics:
 Prepared presentation/ report advice received
 “Read” poems Figures of speech: simile, metaphor,
 personification, idioms, synecdoche,
 metonymy, hyperbole, contrast, irony,

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 sarcasm, anti-climax, euphemism, paradox
 7–9 Observe a conversation/ dialogue “Read” a longer story/short story/drama Record a descriptive/reflective essay Syntax/Semantics:
 and comprehension activity
 Role-play Basic sentence types:
 “Read” poems
 Unprepared presentation Statements, negations, questions, commands,
 topicalisation, conditionals, compound
 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:
 • Observe a signed non-fiction • “Read” an advertisement • Publish recorded text • Movement-hold
 text
 • “Read” a news report • Figures of speech
 • Prepared report
 Term 2

 1-3 Observe a story “Read” a drama/ short story/ longer story Record a diary entry (vlog) Phonology:

CAPS
 Phonological processes

 Forum/group discussion “Read” poems Record a poem o Movement epenthesis

 o Hold deletion/reduction

 o Metathesis

 o Assimilation
 4-6 Observe an interview/ ”speech” / Comprehension activity on news/ maga- Record a review on an unprepared Syntax/ Semantics:
 story “telling” zine items and summarise the text text viewed
 Synonyms, antonyms, paronyms, polysemes,
 homonyms, iconicity, neologisms and etymol-
 ogy
 Role-play a situation “Read” a short story/drama Record a summary
 Discourse:

 Cohesion and coherence

 Chunking
 7-9 Observe and participate in a “Read” a visual text, e.g. advertisement / Record an advertisement review Syntax/ Semantics:
 debate graphs
 Figures of speech: simile, metaphor, person-
 ification, idioms, synecdoche, metonymy, hy-
 Record a discursive essay perbole, contrast, irony, sarcasm, anti-climax,
 Group/forum discussion “Read” poems euphemism, paradox
 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9
 60
 Term 3

 1-3 Observe an interview “Read” interviews Record an interview Morphology:

 61
 Derivational morphology

 Giving instructions/directions “Read” poems Inflectional morphology

 Discourse:

 Story “telling” Roleshift
 4-6 Observe and engage in negotia- “Read” negotiations Record a reflective / argumentative Morphology:
 tions essay
 Verbs: indicating verbs; plain verbs; transitive
 and intransitive verbs; classifiers
 “Read” a short story/ longer story/drama
 Observe and participate in a and comprehension activity Function of space
 debate

 Summary
 7-9 Observe a “speech” by a promi- “Read” a “speech” Record an invitation and formal Syntax/ Semantics:
 nent member of the society reply messages
 Adjectives

 “Read” poems Pronouns (placement and indexing)
 Prepared presentation
 Figures of speech: simile, metaphor, person-
 ification, idioms, synecdoche, metonymy, hy-
 perbole, contrast, irony, sarcasm, anti-climax,
 euphemism, paradox

 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Observe and engage in nego- • “Read” negotiations • Publish recorded text • Roleshift
 tiations
 • Derivational morphology

 • Inflectional morphology
 Term 4

 1-3 Observe and participate in meeting “Read” a summary of a meeting Record a report of the meeting Syntax/ Semantics:
 procedures (role-play)

CAPS
 Adverbs of time, manner, location, intensifica-
 tion
 Sign a point or paragraph summary Record a summary
 Modals
 4-6 Observe a dialogue “Read” a short story/ longer story Record a poem/story Morphology:

 Predicates:

 Forum/group/panel discussion “Read” poems Record a diary entry (vlog) Temporal aspects: simple/punctual – repeti-
 tive/ iterative, habitual

 Durative: - durational and continuative
 Comprehension activity on visual, multi-
 media e.g. advertisement

 Syntax/ Semantics:

 Tense
 7-8 Revision of texts – in preparation Revision and preparation for examination Revision and preparation for exam- Revision and preparation for examination
 of exam ination
 9 - 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9
 62
 BRIDGING GRADE 9

 BRIDGING GRADE 9

 63
 Term Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Language Structures & Conventions
 and
 Week
 Term 1

 1-3 Observe a story Comprehension activity on visual texts, Record a narrative essay Phonology:
 e.g. advertisement Parameters
 Type of signs
 Group discussion/ conversation “Read” a longer story/short story/drama

 4-6 Observe a signed text, e.g. news report “Read” a news/magazine report and Record a report/interview Morphology:
 comprehension activity Classifiers
 Record a social media message Plurals
 (“letter”) of appreciation for help/advice Syntax/Semantics:
 Prepared presentation/ report received
 “Read” poems Concrete nouns: common, proper,
 countable and uncountable nouns
 7–9 Observe a conversation/ dialogue “Read” a longer story/short story/drama Record a descriptive/reflective essay Syntax/Semantics:
 and comprehension activity Basic sentence types:
 Role-play
 Statements, negations, questions,
 “Read” poems
 commands
 Unprepared presentation
 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:
 • Observe a signed non-fiction text • “Read” an advertisement • Publish recorded text • Classifiers
 • Prepared report • “Read” a news report

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Term 2

 1-3 Observe a story “Read” a drama/ short story/ longer Record a diary entry (vlog) Morphology:
 story Classifiers

CAPS
 Syntax/Semantics:
 Forum/group discussion “Read” poems
 Prepositions
 Conjunctions
 4-6 Observe an interview/ ”speech” /story Comprehension activity on news/ Record a summary Syntax/ Semantics:
 “telling” magazine items and summarise the Adjectives, synonyms, antonyms
 text
 Discourse:
 Cohesion and coherence
 Role-play a situation “Read” a short story/drama
 Chunking
 7-9 Observe and participate in a debate “Read” a visual text, e.g. advertisement Record an advertisement review Syntax/ Semantics:
 / graphs Figures of speech: simile, metaphor,
 personification
 Group/forum discussion “Read” poems
 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9
 64
 Term 3

 1-3 Observe an interview “Read” an instructional text, e.g. a Record instructions/directions Morphology:

 65
 recipe Numeral incorporation
 Giving instructions/directions
 Compounds
 Story “telling” Lexicalised fingerspelling

 Discourse:
 Roleshift
 4-6 Observe and engage in negotiations “Read” negotiations Record a reflective / argumentative/ Morphology:
 discursive essay Verbs: indicating verbs; plain verbs;
 Observe and participate in a debate “Read” a short story/ longer story/ transitive and intransitive verbs;
 drama and comprehension activity classifiers
 Function of space
 Summary
 7-9 Observe a “speech” by a prominent “Read” a “speech” Record an invitation and formal reply Syntax/ Semantics:
 member of the society messages Adjectives
 “Read” poems
 Prepared presentation Pronouns (placement and indexing)
 Record a “speech”
 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:
 • Roleshift
 • Observe and engage in negotiations • “Read” a literature text, e.g. a short • Publish recorded text • Verbs
 story/ longer story/drama
 • Prepared presentation

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Term 4

 1-3 Observe and participate in meeting “Read” a summary of a meeting Record a dialogue Syntax/ Semantics:
 procedures (role-play) Adverbs of time, manner, location,

CAPS
 Sign a point or paragraph summary Record a summary of the meeting intensification
 Modals
 4-6 Observe a dialogue “Read” a short story/ longer story Record a short story Morphology:
 Predicates:
 Forum/group/panel discussion “Read” poems Record a character sketch
 Temporal aspects: simple/punctual –
 repetitive/ iterative, habitual

 Syntax/ Semantics:
 Tense
 7-8 Revision of texts – in preparation of exam Revision and preparation for Revision and preparation for Revision and preparation for
 examination examination examination
 • Dialogue

 • Story
 9 - 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9
 66
 SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT IN SASL HOME LANGUAGE
4.1 INTRODUCTION

Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the
performance of learners. It involves four steps: generating and collecting evidence of achievement; evaluating
evidence; recording the findings and using information to understand and thereby assist the learner’s development
in order to improve the process of learning and teaching.

Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning). In both cases
regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance the learning experience.

Assessment in SASL can either be conducted on live signing or signing that is recorded. For Observing and Signing
and Visual Reading and Viewing the learner always produces live signing. It can either be assessed during the
signing or immediately after by recording on a rubric/checklist or the live signing can be recorded by the teacher for
assessment later on. These recordings can be used for moderation, as a basis for feedback to the learner and can
become part of the learner’s portfolio of work. For Recording all work produced is recorded by the learner and handed
to the teacher for assessment.

Assessment in Languages is ongoing and supports the growth and development of learners. It is an integral part of
teaching and learning as it provides feedback for teaching and learning. It should be incorporated in teaching and
learning instead of being dealt with as a separate entity. Furthermore, integrated assessment of various language
aspects should be practiced. For example, we could start off with a visual reading piece and do a comprehension test.
Language knowledge questions could also be addressed based on the same text. “Post-reading” the text learners
could be asked to respond to the text by, for example, recording a text about the issues raised or to sign some
creative response to the content of the text. To wrap up this activity, discussions could be held about the topic and in
this way we address all of the language skills in one fluent, integrated activity.

Assessing the different language skills should not be seen as separate activities but one integrated activity. Assessment
rubrics should thus address the different language skills in the task.

Learners’ Observing skills, signing competence, ability to answer questions, participation in discussions and
Recording skills where necessary should be observed daily.

It is important, too, that learners’ understanding of what they are viewing is assessed and not just their ability to
recognise signs. Assessment of visual reading should therefore also take place regularly and not just be a once- off
assessment. Formal visual reading assessment should focus on activities which help you to determine how much the
learner has understood, for example, “retelling” a story or answering questions.

Assessment of recorded work will focus primarily on the learner’s ability to convey meaning, as well as how correctly
they have signed, for example, correct language structures and conventions used. All assessment should recognise
that language learning is a process and that learners will not produce a completely correct piece of work the first time
round. Therefore the various stages in the recording process should also be assessed.

When giving a formal assessment task, there will be a focus on a particular skill, for example, Observing and Signing
or Visual Reading or Recording. However, because language learning is an integrated process, more than one skill
will be used. The language structures should be assessed in context. It must be ensured that assessment is not only
done as recorded work, but allows for live signing tasks too. It is important to assess what learners understand and
not what they can just memorise, so assess skills in context as much as possible.

Teaching and assessment of languages should make provision for inclusion of all learners, and strategies should be
found to assist all learners to access or produce language texts. Some students experiencing barriers may not be

 67 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 able to attain some of the aims as they are presented in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement.

The programme of assessment allows for summative assessment, which could take the form of a test or examination,
at the end of every term. The work on which assessment is conducted must have been covered during the term. The
assessment items must be pitched at different cognitive levels to ensure validity.

4.2 INFORMAL OR DAILY ASSESSMENT
Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on a learner’s achievement that can
be used to improve their learning.

Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations, discussions,
practical demonstrations, learner–teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, etc. Informal assessment
may be as simple as stopping during the lesson to observe learners or to discuss with learners how learning is
progressing. Assessment of language competence will be in the form of observation, recorded exercises, signed
activities and presentations, tests and other forms of assessment. Informal assessment should be used to provide
feedback to the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but need not be recorded. It should not be seen as
separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom and you may use many of your learning activities to
assess learners’ performance informally. In some cases, you might want to set specific assessment type of activities
to motivate your learners to learn. Learners or teachers can mark these assessment tasks.

It is suggested that you use the first two-weeks of the term to do a baseline assessment of learners. You should use
the activities given in the first two-weeks of the teaching plans to do this assessment. This will enable you to establish
the kind of attention your learners will need as you proceed.

Self-assessment and peer assessment actively involves learners in assessment. This is important as it allows learners
to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily assessment tasks are not formally
recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. Teachers may however which to keep their own informal records of how
individual learners are progressing in the different aspects of the subject to assist with planning and ensuring that
individual learners develop the required skills and understanding. The results of daily assessment tasks are not taken
into account for promotion and certification purposes.

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT
All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as Formal
Assessment. Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression purposes.
All Formal Assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance and to ensure that
appropriate standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing
in a grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, practical tasks,
projects, signed presentations, demonstrations (such as “retelling” a story, matching), performances (such as acting),
essays, participation in signed tasks (such as dialogues, conversations, discussions) and recorded tasks (such as
stories, poems, news items and other types of texts).

The purpose of designing a Programme of Assessment (POA) is to ensure validity, reliability, fairness and sufficiency
of assessment by giving explicit guidance on the types of activities and the percentage allocated to each language
skill within a task. It also addresses the focus of assessment, i.e. the way tasks should be addressed.

In formal assessment, use memoranda, rubrics, checklists and rating scales as well as other appropriate assessment
tools to observe, assess and record learners’ levels of understanding and skill. Choose an assessment tool that is
most appropriate for the type of activity. For example, a rubric is more suitable than a memorandum for a creative
text. A memorandum is better suited to a comprehension activity.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 68
 4.3.1 Formal assessment requirements for SASL Home Language

Formal assessment tasks must assess arrange of aspects of the language skills so that key aspects will be assessed
over the course of the term and the year. Teachers should ensure that these aspects have been informally assessed
and feedback given to the learner before they are formally assessed.

All assessment in the Senior Phase is internal.

The formal Programme of Assessment for Grades7-9 comprises of eleven (11) formal assessment tasks,which
make up 100%.The school based assessment is 40% whereas the end of the year examination is 60%.

School Based Assessment (40%)

The Senior Phase has ten (10) formal assessment tasks for school based assessment. The formal assessment tasks
are packaged as follows:

●● Grade 7 – 4 Observing and Signing tasks, 2 Recording tasks, 3 Visual Reading tests and 1 June examination

●● Grade 8 - 4 Observing and Signing tasks, 3 Recording tasks, 2 Visual Reading tests and 1 June examination

●● Grade 9 - 4 Observing and Signing tasks, 3 Recording tasks, 2 Visual Reading tests and 1 June examination

End of the year examination (60%)

The end of the year examination is comprised of Observing and Signing, Visual Reading and Recording tasks. The
Observing and Signing task, which is Paper 1, is 20.8%.The percentage should be generated from the four Observing
and Signing tasks undertaken during the course of the year. The Recording tasks, which should be administered
under controlled conditions, comprise of two (2) and three (3) papers respectively for Grades 7 & 8, and Grade 9.

Grades 7 & 8

●● Paper 2 – Visual Reading comprehension, Language

●● Paper 3 – Recording

Grades 9

●● Paper 2 – Visual Reading comprehension, Language

●● Paper 3 – Recording

●● Paper 4 – Response to literature

4.3.2 The form of tasks per term

The forms of assessment used should be age and developmental level appropriate. The design of these tasks should
cover the content of the subject and include a variety of tasks designed to achieve the objectives of the subject. It
should be based on the knowledge and skills done during that term. Use the Teaching Plans for each grade to select
the kind of activities and the set of skills required for each part of the formal assessment task, i.e. you can only
expect learners to ‘produce and record’ what you have already taught.

Formal assessment must cater for a range of cognitive levels as shown below. A variety of types of questions such
as multiple choice, cloze procedure, comparison and direct questions should be used.

Cognitive Levels for Assessment

 69 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Cognitive levels Activity Percentage of task
Literal Questions that deal with information explicitly
 stated in the text.
(Level 1)
 • Name the things/people/places/elements
 …

 • State the facts/reasons/points/ideas …

 • Identify the reasons/persons/causes …

 • List the points/facts/names/reasons …

 • Describe the place/person/character ...

 • Relate the incident/episode/experience …

 • Questions that require analysis, synthesis
 or organisation of information explicitly Levels 1 and 2: 40%
 stated in the text.
Reorganisation
 • Summarize the main points/ideas/pros/
 cons/ …
(Level 2)
 • Group the common elements/factors …

 • State the similarities/differences …

 • Give an outline of…
Inference Questions that require a candidate’s
 engagement with information explicitly
 stated in the text in terms of his/her personal
(Level 3)
 experience.
 • Explain the main idea …

 • Compare the ideas/attitudes/actions …

 • What is the author’s/signer’s (or
 character’s)
 intention / attitude/motivation/reason …
 Level 3: 40%
 • Explain the cause/effect of …

 • What does an action/comment/attitude
 (etc.)
 reveal about the narrator/ author/signer/
 character …

 • How does the metaphor/simile/image affect
 your understanding …

 • What, do you think, will be the outcome/
 effect
 of an action/a situation …

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 70
 Cognitive Activity Percentage of task
levels
Evaluation These questions deal with judgments concerning value and
(Level 4) worth. These include judgments regarding reality, credibility,
 facts and opinions, validity, logic and reasoning, and issues
 such as the desirability and acceptability of decisions and
 actions in terms of moral values.

 • Do you think that what transpires is credible/

 realistic/ possible …?

 • Is the author’s/signer’s argument valid/

 logical/conclusive …

 • Discuss/Comment critically on the action/

 intention/ motive/ attitude/suggestion/

 implication …

 • Do you agree with the view/statement/

 observation/ interpretation that…

 • In your view, is the author/signer/narrator/

 character justified in suggesting/ advocating

 that … (Substantiate your response/Give

 reasons for your answer.)

 • Is the character’s attitude/behaviour/action

 justifiable or acceptable to you? Give a reason Levels 4 and 5: 20%
 for your answer.

 • What does a character’s actions/attitude(s)/

 motives … show about him/her in the context of

 universal values?
Appreciation
(Level 5) • Discuss critically/Comment on the value

 judgements made in the text.

 These questions are intended to assess the psychological
 and aesthetic impact of the text on the candidate. They
 focus on emotional responses to the content, identification
 with characters or incidents, and reactions to the author’s/
 signer’s use of language (such as sign choice and imagery).

 • Discuss your response to the text/incident/ situation/
 conflict/dilemma.

 • Do you empathize with the character? What action/
 decision would you have taken if you had been in the same
 situation?

 • Discuss/Comment on the author’s/signer’s use of language

 71 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Discuss the effectiveness of the author’s/signer’s s tyle/
 introduction/ conclusion/imagery/ metaphors/use of poetic
 techniques/ literary devices …

4.4 Programme of Assessment

The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout
a term. A Programme for Assessment must be drawn up by the school indicating the dates on which tasks will be
done.

Subject requirements

Requirements for the compilation of a task are given in percentages. Where the programme indicates 20% for a
language skill it means that in the final allocation of marks for that language skill should be 20% of the total and not
twenty marks. Schools are not limited to a number of marks allocated to a language skill as long as the weighting for
each language skill is observed for each task according to the percentage allocated in the assessment programme.
For example, in Grade 8, a language knowledge test may be set for 50 marks or more, as long as the final weighting
does not exceed the weighting indicated in the assessment programme.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 72
 The following tables provide the formal assessment requirements for SASL Home Language:

Programme of Formal Assessment Task Tables

GRADE 7

 FORMAL ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 1
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: TASK 3: TEST 1
 RECORDING
 1 formal task based on the work covered in the 1 formal task Visual Reading comprehension and
 term based on the language use
 work covered in
 the term
 FORMAL ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 2
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: TEST 2 TASK 3: MID-YEAR EXAMINATION
 Literature: Paper 2: Visual Reading comprehension,
 Contextual Language
 1 formal task based on the work covered in the
 questions
 term Paper 3: Recording
 FORMAL ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 3
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: TASK 3: TEST 3
 RECORDING
 1 formal task Visual Reading comprehension and
 based on the language use
 1 formal task based on the work covered in the
 work covered in
 term OR
 the term
 Literature
 FORMAL AND END-OF-THE-YEAR ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 4
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: END-OF-THE-YEAR EXAMINATION
 1 formal task based on the work covered in the Paper 1: Observing and Signing
 term
 Paper 2: Visual Reading comprehension, Language (2hr)
 Paper 3: Recording (1 hr)

GRADE 8

 FORMAL ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 1
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: TASK 3: TEST 1
 RECORDING
 1 formal task based on the work covered in 1 formal task Visual Reading comprehension and language
 the term based on the use
 work covered
 in the term
 FORMAL ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 2
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: TASK 3: MID-YEAR EXAMINATION
 RECORDING
 1 formal task based on the work covered in 1 formal task Paper 1: Observing and Signing
 the term based on the
 Paper 2: Visual Reading comprehension,
 work covered
 Language
 in the term
 Paper 3: Recording

 73 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 FORMAL ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 3
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: TASK 3: TEST 1
 RECORDING
1 formal task based on the work covered in 1 formal task Visual Reading comprehension and language
the term based on the use
 work covered
 OR
 in the term
 Literature
 FORMAL AND END-OF-THE-YEAR ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 4
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: END-OF-THE-YEAR EXAMINATION
1 formal task based on the work covered in the term Paper 1: Observing and Signing
 Paper 2: Visual Reading comprehension, Language (2hr)
 Paper 3: Recording (1 hr)

GRADE 9

 FORMAL ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 1
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: TASK 3: TEST 1
 RECORDING
1 formal task based on the work covered in 1 formal task Visual Reading comprehension and lan-
the term based on the work guage use
 covered in the term
 FORMAL ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 2
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: TASK 3: MID-YEAR EXAMINATION
 RECORDING
1 formal task based on the work covered in 1 formal task Paper 1: Observing and Signing
the term based on the work
 covered in the term Paper 2: Visual Reading comprehension,
 Language (2hr)

 Paper 3: Recording (1 hr)

 Paper 4: Response to Literature (1 hr 30
 mins)
 FORMAL ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 3
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: RECORD- TASK 3: TEST 1
 ING
1 formal task based on the work covered in 1 formal task Visual Reading comprehension and lan-
the term based on the work guage use
 covered in the term
 FORMAL AND END-OF-THE-YEAR ASSESSMENT TASKS FOR TERM 4
 TASK 1: OBSERVING AND SIGNING TASK 2: END-OF-THE-YEAR EXAMINATION
1 formal task based on the work covered in the term Paper 1: Observing and Signing

 Paper 2: Comprehension, Language (2hr)

 Paper 3: Recording (1 hr)

 Paper 4: Response to Literature (1 hr 30 mins)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 74
 4.5 RECORDING AND REPORTING

Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment
task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in the Curriculum and
Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual
progression within a grade and his or her readiness to progress or be promoted to the next grade. Records of learner
performance should also be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners in the teaching and learning
process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other stakeholders.
Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’ meetings, school
visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls/SMSs, emails, letters, class or school newsletters.
Teachers in all grades report in percentages against the subject. Seven levels of competence have been described
for each subject listed for Grades R-12. The various achievement levels and their corresponding percentage bands
are as shown in the table below.

CODES AND PERCENTAGES FOR RECORDING AND REPORTING

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE
 7 Outstanding achievement 80 – 100
 6 Meritorious achievement 70 – 79
 5 Substantial achievement 60 – 69
 4 Adequate achievement 50 – 59
 3 Moderate achievement 40 – 49
 2 Elementary achievement 30 – 39
 1 Not achieved 0 – 29

Note: The seven-point scale should have clear descriptors that give detailed information for each level.

Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages against the
subject on the learners’ report cards.

4.6 MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT TASKS

Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should
be implemented at school, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation practices must
be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments. This should be done at least once per term.

Moderation should ensure that all assessments are valid, fair, reliable and sufficient. Validity means that the task
should measure the attainment of skills that were taught in line with the skills indicated in the CAPS document.
The task must measure the level of achievement of specific skills. In setting comprehension questions for example,
the learners’ ability to analyse and synthesize information given in a signed text and not to ask questions about
general knowledge related to the text should be tested.

Moderators at school level must give quality comments based on the requirements above to ensure that the
assessment practice at school is enhanced. Moderation cannot simply be a monitoring exercise to check that the
number of tasks has been done or that a memorandum has been applied correctly. In SASL it means that the
moderator will give good comments, among other things, on the levels of questioning in comprehension testing;
the frequency of extended recording; the quality of assessment instruments and the developmental opportunities
afforded and the teacher’s engagement with learners’ recorded work as evidence of performance.

 75 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 The moderation process must also ensure that the ratings given are consistent across all classes in the grade, and
all grades in the phase. For example, a rating of 3 given by one teacher should represent the same level of skill and
knowledge as the same rating given by another teacher. It is therefore important for Subject Heads to do internal
moderation regularly.

4.7 GENERAL

This document should be read in conjunction with:

4.7.1 National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R-12; and

4.7.2 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12.

4.7.3 Guidelines for Responding to learner Diversity in the Classroom Grades R – 12.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 76
 GLOSSARY

adjectives – adjectives can express some feature or quality of a noun; they can come before or after the noun or be
incorporated into the noun; they are often formed by non-manual modification (see non-manual modification)

adverbs – adverbs are used to add in information about an event or situation such as its time, manner, frequency or
place; they are often formed by non-manual modification (see non-manual modification)

alliteration - repetition of parameters

ambiguity - possible double or even multiple meanings of certain signs and expressions; open to two or more
interpretations; or often intended to mislead; vague and unclear or not giving a straight answer

analogy - finding similarities in things that are usually seen as different, a way of explaining or illustrating something,
but not a proof

anticlimax – when an expectation of some high point of importance or excitement is not fulfilled or the seriousness
of a literary plot is suddenly lost as a result of a comical, digressive or meaningless event

attention getting strategies – appropriate way of attracting the attention of and Deaf person, e.g. tapping on the
shoulder, switch lights on and off

audience - the intended viewers of a particular text

author – the signer who produces a recorded text; often referred to as author/signer in this document

bias – a tendency to favour one thing, idea, attitude or person over another which makes it difficult to make a fair
assessment

body language – non-verbal communication consisting of body posture, gestures, facial expressions and eye
movement

chunking (paragraphing) - way of dividing up signed text

classifier – productive morpheme that represents the visual appearance, placement, movement and/or handling
or objects and animate beings; classifiers do not occur in isolation but must be used with a noun referent; can be
inflected to show pluralisation, position and verb movement

climax – the most exciting, effective or important part of the story; this important part is not necessarily at the end

coherence – the underlying logical relationship which links ideas together and gives a chunk unity

cohesion – the linking of sentences or chunks by means of logical connectors such as conjunctions, pronouns or
repetition

collocation – the way that signs tend to group together, e.g. TEA, DRINK, CUP

colloquialism (see also slang) – language belonging to ordinary or familiar conversation but not used in formal
language, often including slang; this may include vocabulary and expressions acceptable among friends, colleagues
or in a close working group; colloquialisms may be inappropriate in formal communications but are appropriate in
some settings and can help to build rapport

compound signs - Compounds are a combination of 2 free morphemes that make a new sign with a different but
related meaning, e.g. PARENTS is a compound of the 2 free morphemes MOTHER and FATHER

 77 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 conditional - Expresses ‘IF’ – ‘then’ relationships between 2 sentences, e.g RAIN (NMF) THERE, UMBRELLA
NONE, YOU WET

connotation / connotative meaning (see also denotative meaning) - both the positive and negative associations
that a word collects through usage that go beyond the literal (primary) meaning

constructed action – a discourse strategy used widely in sign languages in which the signer uses various parts of
their body – such as the head, torso, hands, eye-gaze and other non-manual cues – to depict the actions, utterances,
thought, feelings and/or attitudes of the character; also known as roleshift

context – a text is always used and produced in a context; the context includes the broad and the immediate situation
including aspects such as the social, cultural and political background, the term can also refer to that which precedes
or follows a sign or text and is essential to its meaning

contextual clues – meaning given in the context

denotation / denotative meaning (see also connotative meaning) – the literal or primary meaning of a sign

dialect or regional variation – a variation of a language which includes different vocabulary and expressions; dialect
usually refers to signing characteristic of a particular region but can also be used more broadly to refer to other types
of variants in signing

discourse – longer pieces of text beyond the sentence level

eye gaze – using eyes to index the referent

facial expression – it is the overall configuration of the facial features, including the brows, eye-aperture, nose,
cheeks and mouth

figures of speech/figurative language - signs used in a non-literal way to create a desired effect; literary texts often
make concentrated use of figurative language (e.g. simile, personification, metaphor)

fingerspelling – manual representation of the alphabet of a written language; one-to one relationship between the
letters of the spoken language and the handshape

genre - the types or categories into which signed texts are grouped, e.g. longer stories, drama, poetry

gesture – movement of the hands, face or body which communicates specific messages (e.g. nodding of head to
indicate agreement)

glossing – a way of representing signs and non-manual features in printed words

handshape – this is the parameter that refers to the shape of the hands in its onset; form adopted by the hand
depending on the position of the fingers

higher order questions – these are questions that go beyond basic skills and require critical thinking including
analysis, synthesis and evaluation

iconicity – iconic signs look like the objects they represent; some aspects of the object or action is copied in the sign,
which makes the meaning transparent; visual equivalent of onomatopoeia

indexing – pointing to someone, something or to a particular location with the index finger (referent – people, objects,
events which are initially located in the signing space and thereafter referred to by pointing)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 78
 imperative form – a command, warning or advice

infer and deduce – to pick up meaning behind what is stated and to deduce all the implications; to use the information
in the signed text to work out something that is not directly stated in the signed text

jargon – special terms or expressions used in a trade or profession or by any specific group, e.g. computer or
medical terminology

loan signs – signs borrowed from other sign languages as opposed to the indigenous/ native signs

location – this is the parameter that refers to where the sign is articulated, either on the body or the signing space

metaphor – using one thing to describe another thing which has similar qualities (e.g. ‘Education is the key to
success’)

mode – a method, a way or manner in which something is presented; a way of communicating (e.g. the signing
mode, and the visual mode (which includes graphic forms such as charts); information can be changed from one
mode to another (e.g. converting a graph into a chunk)

mood – atmosphere or emotion in signed texts; it shows the feeling or the frame of mind of the characters; also refers to
the atmosphere produced by visual or multi-media text

movement – this is the parameter that the direction, speed, repetition and manner are important in conveying the
meaning in signing

narrative – a signed account of connected events in order of occurrence, a story

non-manual features – these actions are produced by any part of the body, from the waist up, other than the hands;
carry grammatical meaning using movements of the eyes, eyebrows, head, or shoulders and various kinds of facial
expressions and of lip, cheek, and tongue movement; no English equivalent

non-manual modification - non-manual modifiers consist of the various facial expressions, head tilting, shoulder
raising, mouthing, and similar NMFs that are added to hand signs to create meaning, and are often necessary to
properly form words. Non-manual modifiers are typically adjectival or adverbial. For example, the adverb “th,” the
tongue being placed between the teeth, means “carelessly” or “lazily” when combined with a verb

non-mirroring – when you are signing you use your perspective (non-mirroring); if you are facing a Deaf person
and giving them directions and you ask them to turn right you will sign to your right - the Deaf person facing you will
understand that you are signing from your perspective which is the opposite of theirs

notation system – a number of different systems developed for representing sign languages in written form, e.g.
Stokoe notation, HamNoSys (Hamburg notation system), SignWriting

numeral incorporation – incorporating the hand configurations found in numeral signs into numeral incorporating
signs, e.g. ONE WEEK, TWO WEEKS, THREE WEEKS

open-ended questions – it cannot be answered with a simple yes or no or a specific piece of information and it
gives the person answering the question scope to give the information that seems to them to be appropriate; this is
opposed to a closed-ended question which is a question format that limits respondents with a list of answer choices
from which they must choose, e.g. multiple choice, yes/no and forced alternate questions

orientation – this is the parameter that describes the direction of the palm and/or fingertips during the production of
the sign

 79 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 paraphrase – a restatement of an idea or text in one’s own signs

parameters – these are the five characteristics or basic parts of a sign, namely handshape, location, palm orientation,
movement, non-manual features

personification – attributing human characteristics to non-human things

phonological awareness – children’s awareness of the phonological structure of sign language i.e. parameters;
phonemes are the smallest building blocks of a language; sounds in spoken language vs parameters in sign language

proform – refers to classifiers and indicates any form that stands in the place of, and does the job of, another form/
whole entity, e.g. people, animals and objects

pronoun - a form that stands in the place of, and does the job of, a noun. Pronouns include personal pronouns such
as `I` and `you` and possessive pronouns such as `my` and `your`

register - the use of different signs, style, grammar, signing mode for different contexts, situations, relationships and
familiarity between language users

rhetorical question – this is not a request for information or an answer; the signer answers the question in the
next sentence; a rhetorical question serves the purpose of backgrounding certain information (in the rhetorical
question) and highlighting other information (in the focused phrase), all of which is done for conveying information in
a conversation

roleshift – signers take on the role of two or more characters, with the direction of the body and eye-gaze allowing
not only a shift in roles but also a shift in who is being addressed (also see constructed action)

SASL conventions – norms appropriate to SASL discourse dependent on the genre and context; accepted practices
or rules in the use of SASL

semantics – meaning of signs

signing mode - it is the equivalent to tone in spoken language; the emotion of the signer as conveyed by pace of
utterance, size of signing and NMF; in the context of this qualification also means announcement, articulation, choice
of signs, explanation, statement, turn of phrase, presenting

sign size – appropriate for the audience, context and genre, e.g. large signing would apply to younger children, large
audiences and large venues

SignWriting – a writing system which uses visual symbols to represent the handshapes, movements and facial
expressions of singed languages; an example of a notation system (see also notation system)

slang – informal language often used by a group of people, such as teenagers; the difference between colloquial
language and slang is that slang has not yet been accepted in polite or formal conversation, whereas colloquialisms
have been accepted

stereotype – a fixed conventional view of about what role a particular person is expected to play

style – the distinct and unique manner in which a signer arranges signs to achieve particular effects; combines the
idea to be expressed with the individuality of the signer; includes individual sign choices and signing mode

syntax– also known as grammar; major sign categories i.e. lexical and parts of speech

vlog - video diary as opposed to a blog (written page)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE SENIOR PHASE Grades 7-9 80