CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT

 GRADES 7 - 9

 LANGUAGES

 FRENCH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE
 Department of Basic Education
222 Struben Street
Private Bag X895
Pretoria 0001
South Africa
Tel.: +27 12 357 3000
Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street
Private Bag X9023
Cape Town 8000
South Africa
Tel.: +27 21 465 1701
Fax: +27 21 461 8110
Website: http://www.education.gov.za

© 2017 Department of Basic Education

ISBN: 978-1-4315-2689-5

 1|Page
 CONTENTS PAGE

SECTION 1 Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement 4

1.1 Background 4
1.2 Overview 4
1.3 General aims of the South African curriculum 5
1.4 Time allocation 6
 1.4.1 Foundation Phase 6
 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase 7
 1.4.3 Senior Phase 7
 1.4.4 Grades 10–12 8

SECTION 2 Introducing the Languages 9

2.1 Languages in the National Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement 9
2.1.1 Language levels 9
2.1.2 The language skills 11
2.1.3 Language teaching approaches 11
2.2 Time allocation of First Additional Language in the curriculum 13
2.3 Learning and Teaching Support Materials 14

SECTION 3 Content and Teaching Plans for Language Skills 15

3.1 Listening and speaking 15
3.2 Reading and viewing 21
3.3 Writing and presenting 25
3.4 Language structures and conventions 27
3.5 Teaching plans 32
3.5.1 Spread of texts table 35
3.5.1.1 Grade 7 37
3.5.1.2 Grade 8 49
3.5.1.3 Grade 9 61

SECTION 4 Assessment in Second Additional Language 72

4.1 Introduction 72
4.2 Informal or daily assessment 72
4.3 Formal assessment 72
4.4 Programme of Assessment 74
 4.4.1 Overview of requirements 74
 2|Page
 4.4.2 Examinations 76
4.5 Recording and reporting 77
4.6 Moderation of assessment 77
 4.6.1 Formal assessment (SBA) 77
 4.6.2 Oral assessment tasks 77
4.7 General 78

 Glossary 79

 3|Page
 SECTION 1: CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
1.1 Background
The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the
schooling sector.

To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming
into effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was
developed for each subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject
Assessment Guidelines in Grades R - 12.

1.2 Overview
 (a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement
 for learning and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:
 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion
 requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12; and
 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R – 12 (January 2012).

 (b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (January 2012) replaces the two current
 national curriculum statements, namely the
 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of
 31 May 2002, and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10 - 12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6
 October 2003 and No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

 (c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs (a) and (b) comprise the
 following policy documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R – 12 (January 2012) during the period 2012-2014:
 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject
 Assessment Guidelines for Grades R - 9 and Grades 10 – 12;
 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the
 General Education and Training Band d, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in
 Government Gazette No. 29626 of 12 February 2007;
 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the
 National Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette
 No.27819 of 20 July 2005;
 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior
 Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF),
 regarding learners with special needs, published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11
 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy document, National policy pertaining to the
 4|Page
 programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R
 – 12; and
 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior
 Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF),
 regarding the National Protocol for Assessment (Grades R – 12), promulgated in
 Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.

 (c) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment
 Policy as contemplated in Sections 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of
 the National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South
 African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to
 determine minimum outcomes and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the
 assessment of learner achievement to be applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum
 (a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values
 worth learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and
 apply knowledge and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the
 curriculum promotes knowledge in local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

 (b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 12 serves the purposes of:

  equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability
 or intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfillment, and
 meaningful participation in society as citizens of a free country;
  providing access to higher education;
  facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and
  providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.
 (c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 12 is based on the following principles:

  Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that
 equal educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;
  Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than
 rote and uncritical learning of given truths;
  High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at
 each grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;
  Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;
  Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices
 of social and environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the
 Republic of South Africa. The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 is sensitive to issues
 of diversity such as poverty, inequality, race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;
  Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this
 country as important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

 5|Page
  Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth
 and depth to those of other countries.
 (d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 12 aims to produce learners that are able to:
  identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;
  work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;
  organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;
  collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;
  communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;
  use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the
 environment and the health of others; and
  demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem
 solving contexts do not exist in isolation.
 (e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This
 can only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to
 learning, and how to plan for diversity.
 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant
 support structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based Support Teams,
 Institutional-Level Support Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address
 barriers in the classroom, teachers should use various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those
 included in the Department of Basic Education’s Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning
 (2010).

1.4 Time Allocation

  1.4.1 Foundation Phase

 (a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:
 SUBJECT GRADE R GRADES 1-2 GRADE 3
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)
 Home Language 10 7/8 7/8
 First Additional Language 2/3 3/4
 Mathematics 7 7 7
 Life Skills 6 6 7
  Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)
  Creative Arts (2) (2) (2)
  Physical Education (2) (2) (2)
  Personal and Social Well-being (1) (1) (1)

 TOTAL 23 23 25

 (b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.
 (c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8
 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours
 and a maximum of 3 hours for Additional Language in Grades R – 2. In Grade 3 a maximum of
 6|Page
 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours
 and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.
 (d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R – 2 and 2 hours as indicated
 by the hours in brackets for Grade 3.

 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

 (a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:
 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Mathematics 6
 Natural Science and Technology 3,5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4
  Creative Arts (1,5)
  Physical Education (1)
  Personal and Social Well-being (1,5)
 TOTAL 27,5



 Schools offering an optional language on at least Second Additional Language level may do so if they
 can make an arrangement for the allocation of additional time to the allocated 27.5 hours.

 1.4.3 Senior Phase

 (a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:
 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 5
 First Additional Language 4
 Mathematics 4,5
 Natural Science 3
 Social Sciences 3
 Technology 2
 Economic Management Sciences 2
 Life Orientation 2
 Arts and Culture 2
 TOTAL 27,5

 7|Page
 Schools offering an optional language on at least Second Additional Language level may do so if they
 can make an arrangement for the allocation of additional time to the allocated 27.5 hours.

 1.4.4 Grades 10-12

 (a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:
 Time allocation per week
 Subject
 (hours)
 I. Home Language 4.5
 II. First Additional Language 4.5
 III. Mathematics 4.5
 IV. Life Orientation 2
 V. A minimum of any three subjects selected from 12 (3x4h)
 Group B Annexure B, Tables B1-B8 of the
 policy document, National policy pertaining to
 the programme and promotion requirements of
 the National Curriculum Statement Grades R –
 12, subject to the provisos stipulated in paragraph
 28 of the said policy document.

 The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified
 above, and may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a
 learner wish to offer additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these
 subjects.

 8|Page
 SECTION 2: INTRODUCING THE LANGUAGES
2.1 Languages in the National Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement

Language is a tool for thought and communication. It is also a cultural and aesthetic means commonly
shared among a people to make better sense of the world they live in. Learning to use language
effectively enables learners to acquire knowledge, to express their identity, feelings and ideas, to
interact with others and to manage their world. It also provides learners with a rich, powerful and
deeply rooted set of images and ideas that can be used to make their world other than it is; better and
clearer than it is. It is through language that cultural diversity and social relations are expressed and
constructed, and it is through language that such constructions can be altered, broadened and refined.

2.1.1 Language levels
Language learning in the Senior Phase includes all the official languages in South Africa, namely,
Afrikaans, English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa, isiZulu, Sepedi (Sesotho sa Leboa), Sesotho, Setswana,
Siswati, Tshivenda, Xitsonga – as well as Non-official Languages. These languages can be offered at
different language levels.

Home Language is the language first acquired by learners while First Additional language is the language learnt
in addition to one’s home language. The Second Additional Language is the further language that a learner can
learn, that enables broader communication and multilingualism. The language may be in use within the
community or culture and will enhance nation building and intercultural understanding. Many South African
schools do not offer the home languages of some or all of the enrolled learners but rather have one or two
languages offered at home language level. As a result, the names Home Language, First Additional and Second
Additional Language refer to the proficiency levels at which the language is offered, and not the native (Home)
or acquired (as in the Additional) languages. For the purposes of this policy, any reference to Home Language
should be understood to refer to the level and not the language itself.

The Home Language level provides for language proficiency that reflects the mastery basic
interpersonal communication skills required in social situations and the cognitive academic skills
essential for learning across the curriculum. Emphasis is placed on the teaching of the listening,
speaking, reading and writing skills at this language level. This level also provides learners with a
literary, aesthetic and imaginative ability that will provide them with the ability to recreate, imagine
and empower their understanding of the world they live in. However, the emphasis and the weighting
for listening and speaking from Grades 7 onwards are lower than those of the reading and writing
skills.

The First Additional Language refers to a language which is not a mother tongue but which is used
for certain communicative functions in a society, that is, medium of learning and teaching in
education. The curriculum provides strong support for those learners who will use their first additional
language as a language of learning and teaching. By the end of Grade 9, these learners should be able
to use their home language and first additional language effectively and with confidence for a variety
of purposes, including learning.

In South Africa, many children use their additional language, English, as the Language of Learning
and Teaching (LoLT). This means that they must reach a high level of competence in English. They
need to be able to read and write well in English.

 9|Page
 The First Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge
of the language when they arrive at school. The focus in the first few years of school is on developing
learners’ ability to understand and speak the language – basic interpersonal communication skills. In
Grades 2 and 3 learners start to build literacy on this oral foundation. They also apply the literacy
skills they have already learned in their Home Language.

In the Intermediate and Senior Phases, learners continue to strengthen their listening, speaking,
reading and writing skills. At this stage the majority of children are learning through the medium of
their First Additional Language, English, and should be getting more exposure to it. Greater emphasis
is therefore placed on using the First Additional Language for the purposes of thinking and reasoning.
This enables learners to develop their cognitive academic skills, which they need to study subjects
like Natural Sciences, Mathematics, etc. in English. They also engage more with literary texts and
begin to develop aesthetic and imaginative ability in their Additional Language.

By the time learners enter Senior Phase, they should be reasonably proficient in their First Additional
Language with regard to both interpersonal and cognitive academic skills. However, the reality is that
many learners still cannot communicate well in their Additional Language at this stage. The challenge
in the Senior Phase, therefore, is to provide support for these learners at the same time as providing a
curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards required in further grades. These standards
must be such that learners can use their Additional Language at a high level of proficiency to prepare
them for further or higher education or the world of work. It is therefore recommended that, where
possible, learners in the Senior Phase be exposed to the same concepts in a two week cycle in both
language levels.

The Second Additional Language level also assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge of
the language when they arrive at school. The focus upon exposure to Second Additional Language is on
developing learners’ ability to understand and speak the language - basic interpersonal communication skills. In
Grades 4 - 6 learners start to build their oral and literacy skills. They also apply the oral and literacy skills they
have already learned in their Home and First Additional Languages.

In Grades 7 – 9 learners continue to strengthen their listening and speaking while developing their reading and
writing skills.

By the time learners enter Grade 10, they should be able to communicate in their Second Additional Language
at both interpersonal and social levels. However, the reality is that many learners still cannot communicate well
in their Additional Language at this stage. The challenge in Grades 10-12, therefore, is to provide support for
these learners at the same time as providing a curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards required in
Grade 12. These standards must be such that learners can use their additional language at a level of proficiency
to prepare them for further or higher education or the world of work.

Specific aims of learning Additional Languages
Learning a Second Additional Language should enable learners to:
  acquire the language skills necessary to communicate appropriately in the target language at a basic
 level;
  listen, speak, read/view and write the language with growing confidence and enjoyment. These skills
 and attitudes form the basis for life-long learning;
  express their own ideas, views and emotions with confidence (orally and in writing), in order to
 become comfortable in the language;
  use language and their imagination to find out more about themselves and the different cultures and the
 world around them. This will enable them to express their experiences and findings about the world
 orally and in writing;

 10 | P a g e
  use language to access and manage communication in other contexts. Information literacy is a vital
 skill in the ‘information age’ and forms the basis for lifelong learning;
  use language as a means for expressing information on familiar topics; for interacting with a familiar
 range of texts; and for reading texts for enjoyment, basic information and communication.

2.1.2 The language skills

The Second Additional Language curriculum is packaged according to the following skills:
 1. Listening and Speaking
 2. Reading and Viewing
 3. Writing and Presenting
 4. Language Structures and Conventions

2.1.3 Language Teaching Approaches

The approaches to teaching language in these documents are text-based, communicative, integrated
and process orientated.
The text-based approach and the communicative approach are both dependent on the continuous
use and production of texts. The text-based approach explores how texts work. The purpose of a
text-based approach is to enable learners to become competent, confident and critical readers, writers,
viewers and designers of texts. It involves listening to, reading, viewing and analysing texts to
understand how they are produced and what their effects are. Through this critical interaction, learners
develop the ability to evaluate texts. The text-based approach also involves producing different kinds
of texts for particular purposes and audiences. This approach is informed by an understanding of how
texts are constructed.
A communicative approach suggests that when learning a language, a learner should have a great
deal of exposure to the target language and many opportunities to practise or produce the language by
communicating for social or practical purposes. Language learning should be carried over into the
classroom where literacy skills of reading/viewing and writing/presenting are learned by doing a great
deal of reading and learning to write by doing much writing.
Language teaching happens in an integrated way, with the teacher modelling good practice, the
learners practising the appropriate skills in groups before applying these skills on their own. The
structure of each lesson should be one that engages the whole class before practising in groups and
applying the new skill individually.

The process approach is used when learners produce oral and written texts. The learners
engage in different stages of the listening, speaking, reading and writing processes. They
must think of the audience and the purpose during these processes. This will enable them to
communicate and express their thoughts in a natural way. For example, the teaching of
writing does not focus on the product only but also focus on the process of writing. During
process writing learners are taught how to generate ideas, to think about the purpose and
audience, to write drafts, to edit their work and to present a written product that
communicates their thoughts.

Approaches to teaching literature

The teaching of literature should focus on teaching for comprehension and will include the reading
process strategies (pre-reading, reading and post-reading). The main reason for reading literature in
the classroom is to develop in learners a sensitivity to a special use of language that is more refined,
 11 | P a g e
 literary, figurative, symbolic and deeply meaningful than much of what else they may read. While
most literary texts are forms of entertainment, amusement, or revelation, serious writers create novels,
plays and poems because they have ideas, thoughts and issues, principles, ideologies and beliefs that
they most want to share with or reveal to their prospective readers. Their imaginative use of language
is an added method of revealing, reinforcing and highlighting their ideas.
The teaching of literature is never easy, but it is impossible without the personal, thoughtful and
honest interpretations and comments from the learners themselves. Unless they learn how to
understand a literary text on their own, they will not have learned much. Teachers often need to
restrain their own interpretations and ideas of literary texts and allow as much learner participation as
is reasonable. Interpretation is not about right or wrong. It is about searching for what is meaningful
to the reader.

The best ways to approach the teaching of literature would involve some or all of the following.

 • Make every attempt to read as much of the text in class as possible without breaking for
 any other activity. This may take more than the scheduled two weeks for the Second
 Additional learner. It is essential that learners have a clear idea of what is going on at the
 most basic level of the text. Some classes can read texts without support. That is to be
 encouraged. Genres, and the approach to such, should be taught, rather than texts. For
 example, Poetry should be taught, not poems. Read as many as possible in class and
 ensure that learners write poems as well.

 • Literary interpretation is essentially a university level activity. Learners in this phase do
 not have to learn this advanced level of interpretation. However, the purpose of teaching
 literary texts is to show learners how the Second Additional Language can be used with
 subtlety, intelligence, imagination and flair. This means a close look at how text is being
 created, manipulated and re-arranged to clarify and emphasise what is being expressed.
 Such work might involve examining the presence or absence of imagery; what kind of
 imagery is being selected by the writer and why; sentence structures and paragraphing, or
 the layout of poems; choice of words, continuing motifs through the text; the use of
 symbol, sound and colour where appropriate. Most of this work should be text based

 • Creative writing should be closely attached to the study of any literary text. Writing
 activities that demand a close understanding of the text being read can prove very helpful
 in reaching more creative levels of appreciation on the part of the learners. Class
 discussions can be fruitful as long as everyone is involved. But class discussions that lead
 to written work activities serve a clearer purpose and benefit both.

 • Finally, it is important to point out that Literature is not about right answers. A whole text
 means something, not just bits and pieces of it. A good reading of a text incorporates the
 whole text in interpretative, creative, personal and exploratory practices.

The other approaches to literature which can be integrated with teaching for comprehension and for
understanding the key features of literature are the chronological, the author, the theme and the
genre approaches. These approaches can be combined.
In the chronological approach learners can research and combine the literature period with the
historical events for the same timeframe.
In the author approach, learners can participate in a broad and deep study of an author especially in
poetry and can link his/her poems with a particular historical period.
 In the theme approach learners can look at themes such as justice, success, love, etc. across a
number of poems or across different genres and relate them to events in real life situations. They can
make judgments about the character’s actions and comment on the theme.
Regarding the genre approach, learners can classify, compare and contrast different types of literary
genre, e.g., the difference between the plots in a novel/ short story/drama/folklore.

 12 | P a g e
 Approaches to teaching language usage

The teaching of language structure should focus on how language is used and what can be done with
language, i.e. how to make meaning, how to attend to problems and interests, influence friends and
colleagues, and how to create a rich social life. The teaching of language structures should be a means
to getting things done.

The teaching of language structures/ grammatical structures should therefore be text-based,
communicative and integrated.

The following principles should be taken into consideration when teaching language structures:

  Grammar should be taught for constructing texts in their context of use - it is concerned, in
 other words, with real language.
  The application of grammar should not be restricted to the analysis of isolated sentences – it
 should explain the way in which sentences are structured to construct whole texts such as
 stories, essays, letters and reports which learners learn to read and write in school.
  Use of authentic materials such as dialogues, interviews, must be encouraged
  Link the language structure with functional uses of language in different social
 settings, e.g. expressing one’s thoughts or feelings; introducing people; talking
 about or reporting things, actions, events or people in the environment, in the
 past or in the future; making requests; making suggestions; offering food or
 drinks and accepting or declining politely; giving and responding to
 instructions; comparing or contrasting things.
  Use classroom activities that relate language forms with functions, e.g. the past
 tense with a narrative essay and report writing;
  Focus on meaningful tasks. Acquiring the grammatical rules of the language does
 not necessarily enable the learner to use the language in a coherent and meaningful
 way. What interests us then concerns the structure and function beyond the
 sentence level, i.e. the way in which people use either spoken language (discourse)
 or written language (text) in coherent and meaningful ways.
  The issues of pronunciation and intonation should not be penalized unless they
 create communication breakdown.

2.2 Time allocation for the Second Additional Language

In a two-week cycle the following time allocation for the different language skills is suggested:

 Skills Time allocation Time Allocation per Two %
 per week Week Cycle (Hours)
 (Hours)
Listening & Speaking 1 25
Reading & Viewing: Comprehension & 2 1 25
Literature
Writing & Presenting 1 25
Language structures and conventions 1 25
(this is also integrated into the 4 skills)

The teaching time for Second Additional Language is 2 hours per week. All language content is
taught within a two-week cycle (4 hours). Teachers do not have to stick rigidly to this cycle but

 13 | P a g e
 must ensure that the language skills, especially reading and writing are practised. The time
allocation for the different language skills in Grade 7-9 is 36 weeks. Four weeks are for examination
purposes – two weeks for June examination and another two weeks for December examination.

2.3 Learning and Teaching Support Materials

Learners should have the following for Second Additional Language study in Grades 7 – 9:
 GRADES 7 – 9
 Core materials
 Prescribed language textbook √
 Dictionary √
 One of the following approved/prescribed literary *genres
 Short Novel √
 Short stories √
 Folklore √
 Short Drama √
 Poetry √
 Media materials
 Newspapers √
 Magazines √
 Radio talks/dramas √
 Television shows/ dramas / √
 documentaries

* Learners must have been exposed to three genres by the end of the phase, for example, one genre per
grade.

Second Additional Language teachers should have:
 a) A Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement
 b) Language in Education Policy
 c) The prescribed language textbook used by learners and other textbooks for resource
 purposes, in addition to the prescribed one
 d) Dictionary (monolingual, bilingual, multilingual, thesaurus)
 e) Relevant prescribed literature genres
 f) A variety of media materials: newspapers, magazines, brochures, flyers, etc.
 g) Access to audio/visual aids to be used in the classroom
 h) Other media resources (a variety of newspapers, magazines and brochures)

Classroom resources
a) A range of texts to accommodate different reading levels, e.g. a selection of readers with
 sufficient copies of texts at each level for the class.
b) A variety of media materials: newspapers, magazines, brochures, flyers, advertisements, posters,
 notices, etc.
c) Audio/visual aids

 14 | P a g e
 SECTION 3: Content and Teaching Plans for Language Skills

This section is divided into TWO components: an overview of the skills, content and strategies and the Teaching
Plans.

3.1 Listening and Speaking
Listening and speaking are different but interdependent skills. Both are continually present informally in the
classroom as learners receive and discuss information. Formal listening and speaking of special forms, e.g. role
play or dialogue, need focused instruction. Formal and informal listening and speaking are integrated with
reading, writing and language practice, and while speaking may give written text an oral form (e.g. reading
aloud).
LISTENING

Listening process
Listening instruction will usually involve working through elements of the listening process. This is a three-
phase activity which models independent listening strategies for decoding and understanding speech and other
audio forms. Not every step of the process will be used on every occasion. For example, if learners are
listening to a recorded explanation they may need to do a reading as a pre-listening activity which alerts them
to the need for focused listening and helps them make associations with their own experience. Listening
activities would help them recall details. Post-listening might involve learners in responding to what they have
heard by answering simple questions.

Listening comprehension exercises and assessment give an opportunity to teach learners how to listen.

Listening process
1. Pre-listening introduces learners to the listening situation. It allows them to activate their previous
knowledge of the topic, and prepare for listening.
  Stimulate /activate background knowledge before listening, so that their knowledge of that particular
 type of discourse is activated.
  Predict what text may be about from title/discuss theme of text
  Deal with any key vocabulary that learners may not be familiar with
  Set a pre-listening question to focus learners’ attention
  Prepare learners physically with, for example, pencil and pad for note taking

2. During listening learners pay attention for various purposes:
(Note that it is good practice for learners to listen to a text several times, focusing on a different aspect each
time.)
2.1 Listen for specific information
  Search for meaning; identify main and supporting ideas
  Constantly check understanding of message by making and confirming predictions and through
 questioning
  Make meaningful notes; outline, map, categorize, summarise, retell, following instructions
  Be aware of speaker / presenters’ body language and other visual cues

2. 2 Listen for interaction
  Use turn-taking conventions in conversations or group work
  Ask questions to sustain communication
  Respond to language, gestures, eye contact and body language
  Signal interest and attention appropriately through expression, posture etc
  Use the appropriate conventions to be polite and show respect for others

2.3 Listen for appreciation
  Respond to the aesthetic qualities of oral text, e.g. rhythm, pace, sound effects
  Respond in communication situations
  Use turn-taking conventions in conversations
 15 | P a g e
  Defend a position
  Ask questions to sustain communication
  Respond to language, gestures, eye contact and body language
  Show understanding of the relationship between language and culture by showing respect for
 cultural conventions

 3. Post-listening follows up on the listening experience. Learners –
  Answer questions
  Review notes
  Summarise
  Transfer information from oral to written mode, e.g. use information to label a picture
  Synthesise new information with prior knowledge
  Draw conclusions, give own opinion;

 Suggested length of texts to be used for listening comprehension
 Texts* Grades Disjunctive Conjunctive
 orthography orthography
  Oral, visual, audio-visual and multimodal 7 about 30 seconds at least
 texts from the mass media 30 seconds
  Audio texts
  Creative texts
  Referential and informational texts
  Texts for enrichment 8 at least 45 at least 45
  Audio-visual texts (Films, television seconds seconds
 programmes and documentaries, slide shows,
 recordings, radio programmes, photographs, 9 At least 1 minute At least 1 minute
 music videos)

 SPEAKING

 Speaking instruction needs to recognise a wide range of informal and formal speaking situations, from casual
 conversation to formal speaking. Speaking clearly, fluently, coherently, confidently and appropriately should
 be the aim of teaching speaking.

 The teaching of speaking should include knowledge of the process and communication strategies.

 The speaking process and strategies
 The speaking process consists of the following stages:
  Planning: researching and organising
  Practising
  Presenting

 Formal speaking and presenting
 The formal speaking process will usually involve the above-mentioned three stages. Formal presentation forms
 may involve a written or oral version which teachers may assess.

1. 1. Planning: researching and organising
 Learners demonstrate planning, researching and organising skills for oral presentation. They

  Use resources and reference materials to find and select information
  Organise and write information; note-taking;
  Use an effective introduction and conclusion,
  Develop ideas orally in a logical manner

 16 | P a g e
  Use objects, audio and/or visual aids to enhance the appeal and accuracy of presentations

2. 2. Practising and presenting
 Learners demonstrate practising and oral presentation skills. They

  Use appropriate forms of address
  Show an awareness of audience;
  Show an awareness of situation: formal or informal speech
  Express own opinion
  Use correct language structures and conventions
  Use appropriate verbal and non-verbal techniques to reinforce meaning, e.g. tone, voice
 projection / modulation, volume, pace / tempo, phrasing, eye contact, facial expressions, gestures and
 body language
  Strive to speak with appropriate, clear intonation and pronunciation

 Informal speaking and group work (see “Features and conventions of oral communication” below)
  Initiate and sustain conversations
  Ask and respond to questions to sustain communication
  Use turn-taking conventions
  Clarify meaning where appropriate
  Respond to language, gestures, eye contact and body language
  Signal interest and attention appropriately through expression, posture and gesture

 3.1.1 Features and conventions of oral communication texts

1. 3.1.1.1. Informal speaking and group work

 Speaking/ Purpose Features
 oral text
 form
 Informal To communicate  Initiate and sustain conversations
 conversation on given topics  Use turn-taking conventions
 / dialogue /  Fill in gaps and encourage the speaker
 group work  Clarify meaning where necessary
  Ask and respond to questions to sustain communication
 See  Respond to language, gestures, eye contact and body language
 Expressions  Signal interest and attention appropriately through expression,
 used in posture and gesture
 conversation.
 Reference
 list
 Unprepared To share a text  Read fluently and audibly
 reading  Pronounce words without distorting meaning
 aloud

2. 3.1.1.2 Formal speaking and presenting
 See also general comments on planning and presenting above.

 Speaking/ Purpose Features
 oral text form
 Prepared Various: to  Conduct preparation / research
 speech inform / share  Organise material coherently. Choose and develop main ideas
 and support with examples
 This form  Use correct format, vocabulary, language and conventions
 will display  Use tone, voice projection, pace, eye contact, posture and

 17 | P a g e
 evidence of gestures
 preparation  Use effective introduction and conclusion
  Use appropriate style and register
  Incorporate appropriate visual, audio and/or audiovisual aids,
 e.g. charts, posters, objects, images
 Prepared To share a text  Read fluently and attentively according to purpose and task
 reading aloud written by self or  Pronounce words without distorting meaning
 other, e.g. to  Enhance meaning through tone, voice projection, pace, eye
 entertain contact, posture and gestures

3. 3.1.1.3 Speaking for specific purposes / contexts
4.
 Speaking/ Purpose Features
 oral text form
 Giving  To tell someone  Use mostly the imperative form
 directions how to get  Use concise and clear sentences
 somewhere  Use chronological order
  Refer to a specific direction
  Indicate the approximate distance
  Provide information about landmarks along the way
 Instructions To explain how to  Explain how to make / do something
 complete a task /  Mention the materials needed
 prepare food, etc.  Provide a clear, correct and logical sequence of instructions
  Use appropriate vocabulary,

 Suggested duration of oral communication
 (Note: the approximate time to read one A4 page in disjunctive orthography is about 3 minutes)
 Texts Duration
 Grades 7-9
 Conversations 5 – 10 minutes for group / class
 Dialogues 1-2 minutes for a pair
 Directions and instructions 1 minute
 Prepared reading 1 minute
 Prepared speeches 1 minute
 Relating events Up to 2 minutes
 Day-to-day oral communication, e.g. seeking assistance, 1 – 2 minutes
 apologising

 3.1.1.4 Expressions used in conversation – Reference list

 ASKING PERMISSION/ REQUESTS INTERRUPTING

  Est-ce que je peux… ?  Excuse-moi, est-ce que je peux... ?
 Excusez-moi, pourrais-je… ?
  Est-ce que je pourrais… ?
  Pardon, tu penses que je peux… ?
  Serait-il possible pour moi de… ? Pardon, pensez-vous que je puisse…

  Est-ce que ça va si… ?  Excuse-moi, tu connais… ?
 Excusez-moi, connaissez-vous… ?
  Est-ce que ça irait si… ?
  Excuse-moi, tu peux m’aider ?
  Ça t’ennuie si je… ? Excusez-moi, pourriez-vous m’aider ?
 Ça vous ennuie si je… ?

 18 | P a g e
  S’il te plaît, laisse-moi…
 S’il vous plaît, laissez-moi…

  Serais-tu d’accord de… ?
 Seriez-vous d’accord de… ?

OFFERING HELP SEEKING ASSISTANCE

  Puis-je vous aider ?  Peux-tu m’aider à… ?
 Pouvez-vous m’aider à… ?
 Puis-je t’aider ?
  Pourrais-tu m’aider à… ?
  Est-ce que je peux t’aider? Pourriez-vous m’aider à… ?
 Est-ce que je peux vous aider ?
  J’ai besoin d’aide pour…
  Tu cherches quelque chose?
 Vous cherchez quelque chose?  Veuillez m’aider à…

  Tu veux de l’aide?  Peux-tu me donner un coup de main pour…
 Vous voulez de l’aide? Pourriez-vous me donner un coup de main
 pour…
  Tu as besoin d’aide?
 Vous avez besoin d’aide?

  Qu’est-ce que je peux faire pour toi
 aujourd’hui?
 Que puis-je faire pour vous aujourd’hui ?

APOLOGISING COMPLAINING

  Désolé(e).  Je suis désolée de devoir te dire ça, mais…
 Je suis désolée de devoir vous dire cela,
  Je suis désolé(e) de… mais…

  Je regrette de…  Excuse-moi de te déranger, mais…
 Excusez-moi de vous déranger, mais…
  S’il te plaît, pardonne-moi de…
 S’il vous plaît, pardonnez-moi de…  Il est possible que tu aies oublié de…
 Il est possible que vous ayez oublié de…
  Je m’excuse de…
  Je pense que tu as peut-être oublié de…
  Pardonne-moi.
 Je pense que vous avez peut-être oublié de…
 Pardonnez-moi.
  Excuse-moi si c’est déplacé, mais…
  Excuse-moi. Excusez-moi si c’est déplacé, mais…
 Excusez-moi.
  Il a pu y avoir un malentendu au sujet de…
  Je te demande pardon.
 Je vous demande pardon.  Qu’on ne se méprenne pas, …

GIVING ADVICE STATING A PREFERENCE

 19 | P a g e
  Je ne pense pas que tu devrais…  Est-ce que tu voudrais… ?
 Je ne pense pas que vous devriez… Voulez-vous… ?

  Tu devrais…  Je préférerais…
 Vous devriez…
  Pourquoi on ne…
  Tu ne devrais pas…
 Vous ne devriez pas…  Et bien, je préférerais… Tu en penses quoi?
 Et bien, je préférerais… Qu’en pensez-vous?
  Si j’étais toi, je…
 Si j’étais vous, je…  Qu’est-ce que tu penses qu’on devrait faire?
 Que pensez-vous qu’on devrait faire ?
  Si j’étais dans ta position, je…
 Si j’étais dans votre position, je…  Si cela ne tenait qu’à moi, je…

  Si j’étais à ta place, je…  Je pense qu’on devrait…

 Si j’étais à votre place, je…

  Tu aurais mieux fait de…
 Vous auriez mieux fait de…

  Il ne faudrait pas que tu…
 Il ne faudrait pas que vous…

  Quoique tu fasses, ne … pas …

 Quoique vous fassiez, ne … pas …

GUESSING, INFERRING GIVING IMPRECISE INFORMATION

  Je dirais qu’il est presque prêt à ...  Il y a environ…

  Cela manque peut-être de …  Il y a approximativement…

  Il pourrait être…  Il y a un grand nombre de…

  On dirait que…  … prévoie(nt) jusqu’à…

  Il a peut-être besoin de…  C’est un peu…

  Peut-être qu’ils veulent…  C’est le type de…

  C’est difficile à dire, mais j’imagine que…  Ils sont du genre à…

  Je ne suis pas trop sûr(e), mais je pense que…  C’est difficile à dire, mais je dirais…

  Je ne suis pas trop sûr(e), mais je pense…

 20 | P a g e
 SAYING GOODBYE EVALUATING YOURSELF
Long trips, vacations, short outings
  Ça a bien marché / c’était efficace parce
  Bon voyage. que…

  Passe de bonnes vacances.  J’ai fait ça bien parce que…
 Passez de bonnes vacances.
  Cela aurait été mieux si j’avais…
  Fais bon voyage.
 Faites bon voyage.  Cela pourrait être amélioré en…

  Profite bien de tes vacances.  Les progrès sont / ne sont pas évidents parce
 Profitez bien de vos vacances. que…

  Profite!
 Profitez!

  Amuse-toi bien à … (destination place such as
 a restaurant OR city)

GREETING AFTER A TRIP

  Comment se sont passées tes vacances à… ?

  Ça t’a plu à (destination)?
 Ça vous a plu à… ?

  Comment s’est passé le voyage/le vol?

3.2 Reading and Viewing
Reading / viewing combines two elements: 1) learning and applying strategies for decoding and understanding text
2) learning and applying knowledge of text features. Both aspects should be present in reading/viewing instruction
of literary and non-literary texts.
Reading / viewing content is arranged in: 1) reading for comprehension and 2) extended independent reading.

Reading process
Reading instruction will usually involve working through elements of the reading process. This is a three-phase
activity which models independent reading strategies for decoding and understanding text. Not every step of the
process will be used on every occasion. For example, if learners are reading an unfamiliar text type or genre, they
will need to do a pre-reading activity which alerts them to surface features of this text type, and helps them make
associations with their own experience. Reading activities would help them analyse its structure and language
features in more detail. Post-reading might involve learners in trying to reproduce the genre in a written text of
their own.

Reading and viewing process

1. Pre-reading introduces learners to the text. It activates associations and previous knowledge.
  Skimming and scanning text features: titles, headings, subheadings, captions, visual elements and graphic
 information, e.g., layout, icons, illustrations, graphs, charts, diagrams, maps, key words, word searches,
 pictures etc.
  Predicting using the information gained from skimming and scanning
  Dealing with any key vocabulary that may be unfamiliar to the learners

2. Reading involves making meaning of the text and paying close attention to its language features
 21 | P a g e
  Actively making sense of the text
  Deducing the meaning of unfamiliar words and images by using word attack skills and contextual clues
  Using comprehension strategies: making connections, monitoring comprehension, adjusting reading speed
 to text difficulty, re-reading where necessary, looking forward in the text for information that might help,
 asking and answering questions (from lower to higher order), visualizing, inferring, reading for main ideas,
 attending to word choice and language structures, recognizing the text type by its structure and language
 features
  Making notes or summarising main ideas.

3. Post-reading enables the learners to view and respond to the text as a whole.
  Answering questions on the text from lower order to higher order;
  Comparing and contrasting;
  Drawing conclusions and expressing own opinion
  Reproducing the genre in writing of their own (where appropriate)

Examples of question types

 Knowledge questions Qui… ? Que/Qu’est-ce que…? Où ?

 Comprehension Qui est le père …?
 questions

 Application questions Pouvez-vous formuler une phrase avec ce verbe ? Pouvez-vous former une
 phrase similaire avec ce verbe ?

 Analysis questions Est-ce similaire au …? Est-ce différent de …? Pourquoi ce personnage aime-t-
 il …? Vrai ou Faux ?

 Evaluation questions Lequel préférez-vous?

Selecting a text-type or genre
Teachers should ensure that learners read a range of texts and genres during the year. There should be a balance
between reading texts for comprehension, communication and enjoyment.

3.2.1 INTENSIVE READING

3.2.1.1 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for COMPREHENSION at a word level

Learners apply a variety of strategies to decoding texts. They build vocabulary through word-attack skills
and exposure.
  Use dictionaries and other reference works to determine the meaning, spelling, pronunciation and parts of
 speech of unfamiliar words
  Identify the meaning of common prefixes (e.g., in-, bi-, mono-, mal-, im- or re-) and common suffixes (e.g.
 – ment, -age).
  Determine the meaning of words and their connection to word families using knowledge of common roots,
 suffixes and prefixes
  Use textual context (e.g., in-sentence definitions), cues (e.g., commas, quotes) and graphic cues (e.g. bold
 face) to determine the meaning of unfamiliar words
  Recognize and use common idioms and proverbs, e.g. Tout ce qui brille n’est pas or; Coûter les yeux de la
 tête ; Le chat parti, les souris dansent ; C’est dommage ! etc
  Identify the origin and use of new words, e.g. street slang, borrowed words (e.g. weekend, bouffe,
 couscous, fric…).
  Distinguish between commonly confused words: homophones, homonyms, synonyms, e.g. allusion /
 illusion; complément/ compliment; impliquer/ inférer ; ces / ses / c’est / s’est / sais / sait ; air/aire/ ère
  Recognise some abbreviations: PTT; RER; RATP; QCM
  Apply knowledge of grammar to decode meaning.

 22 | P a g e
 3.2.1.2 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for COMPREHENSION at sentence and paragraph level

Learners apply their grammatical knowledge to understand sentence construction and the organisation of
texts. Text study at this level provides an opportunity for integrated teaching of language structures.
  Identify and use the meaning and functions of language structures and conventions in texts

3.2.1.3 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for COMPREHENSION at a whole text level

Learners apply their knowledge of genre to understand the meaning, intention and effect of the whole text
  Relate the text to their own experience
  Draw conclusions; form own opinion

3.2.1.4 Intensive reading of shorter texts for SUMMARY AND NOTE TAKING.

Learners apply their understanding of text features to summarise text. See reading strategies above.
  Skim and scan for main ideas and theme
  List main ideas

3.2.1.5 Intensive reading of MULTIMODAL AND VISUAL TEXTS (Multimodal texts make use of visual and
written material in a single text e.g. advertisements, cartoons. They can also combine this with spoken
language and gesture.)

Learners apply their knowledge of images and visual elements to understand how these support writing in
multimodal texts.
 Identify and discuss the purpose and message of visual texts created for enjoyment and entertainment, e.g.
 film, cartoons, music videos, comic strips

3.2.2 READING OF LITERARY TEXTS / GENRES

Learners read to enjoy and appreciate literary texts / genres and they respond to questions of comprehension.
They understand the basic features of different literary forms, e.g. that a poem has different characteristics
from a short story.

EXTENDED INDEPENDENT READING / VIEWING

Learners practise the strategies modelled in intensive reading for pleasure. Teacher guidance on access and
level is crucial to this part of the reading.
  Access libraries and know book storage conventions
  Read / view a variety of whole texts, e.g. books, magazines, newspapers, websites and films after class.

 23 | P a g e
 TEXTS USED FOR THE INTEGRATED TEACHING OF LANGUAGE SKILLS
 GRADES 7 - 9
In addition to literary texts for formal study, texts to be covered in grades 7 – 9 include written, visual and
multimedia texts with different purposes. Some texts will be studied for their aesthetic qualities; some texts will be
studied as examples and as models for writing
A range of literary texts to be Written texts for information Multimedia / visual texts for
read. Dictionaries information
 Encyclopaedias Charts, maps
Recommended Genres Schedules Graphs, tables, pie charts
The following recommended literary Telephone directories Mind-maps, diagrams
genres as included in the National Textbooks Posters
Literature Catalogue: Thesaurus Flyers, pamphlets, brochures
 Timetables Signs and symbols
Short Novel TV guides TV documentaries
 Web pages, internet sites, blogs
Short stories / Folklore Written texts in the media Facebook and other social networks
(Grades 7 – 1 story) Magazine articles Data projection
(Grade 8 – 1 story) Newspaper articles Transparencies
(Grade 9 – 2 stories) Editorials
 Notices Multimedia / visual texts for
Short Drama Advertisements aesthetic purposes
 Written forms of audio texts Films
Poetry Dialogues Photographs
(Grade 7 – 2 poems) Speeches Illustrations
(Grade 8 – 2 poems) Songs
(Grade 9 – 3 poems) Multimedia / visual texts for
 Written interpersonal and enjoyment and entertainment
Enrichment transactional texts Films
Films Letters TV programmes
Selected TV series/ documentaries Diaries Music videos
Radio dramas Invitations Cartoons, caricatures
Essays Emails Comic strips
Biographies sms’s, twitter Graffiti
Autobiographies Notes
Folk tales Reports Audio texts / Acoustic impulses
Myths and legends Radio programmes
 Written interpersonal texts in Readings of dramas or texts
 business Readings of novels or short stories
 Recorded speeches

 Advertisements on radio, TV
 newspapers and magazines

Length of written texts to be read for intensive reading / comprehension and summary

 Grades Disjunctive orthography Conjunctive orthography
Text for reading aloud 7 200 – 250 words 40 – 70 words
 5-6 sentences (1 par)
 8 250 – 300 words 70 – 90 words
 5-8 sentences (2 par)
 9 300 – 350 words 90 – 110 words
 5-10 sentences (3 par)
Comprehension 7 200 – 250 words 40 – 70 words
 8 250 – 300 words 70 – 90 words
 9 300 – 350 words 90 – 110 words

 24 | P a g e
 3.3 Writing and presenting: process, content, strategies and texts
Writing and presenting combines three elements: 1) using the writing process 2) learning and applying
knowledge of the structure and features of different text types 3) learning and applying knowledge of paragraph
and sentence structure and punctuation
Writing process
Writing instruction will usually involve working through the writing process. However, not every step of the
process will be used on every occasion. For example, if learners are writing a familiar text type, they will not
need to analyse its structure and language features in so much detail. There may also be occasions when
teachers need to focus on sentence structure or paragraph writing, or learners write texts without drafts in
preparation for the examination.

Selecting a text-type
Teachers should ensure that learners write a range of texts during the year. There should be a balance between
different types of texts and writing for different purposes: transactional texts, creative, personal/interpersonal,
texts etc. Teachers should choose a text type and an appropriate topic to write about, for example,
narrative/descriptive paragraph on the topic: “My favourite food.”

Steps in process writing
Pre-writing
 Expose learners to relevant vocabulary and similar text type.
 Brainstorm ideas for the topic

Planning
 Create a plan for the text using the structure and ideas discussed in the pre-writing stage
 Identify main ideas for example, by using a mind map
 Sequence ideas in a logical order so that they make sense

Drafting
 Write a rough first draft that takes into account purpose, audience, topic and text type
 Choose appropriate words.
 Organise ideas in a logical sequence so that a story makes sense
 Organise ideas and/or images
 Read drafts critically and get feedback from teacher

Revising, editing, proofreading and presenting
 Evaluate their own and others’ writing for improvement using set criteria
 Refine word choice, sentence and paragraph structure
 Work on the sequencing and linking of paragraphs
 Use grammar, spelling and punctuation correctly
 Prepare the final draft including layout
 Present the text

Learners apply their knowledge of language structures and conventions to writing texts

Word choice
 Know and use a range of vocabulary
 Know what part of speech a word is and how to use it in a sentence
 Know whether a word is formal, informal, or slang (or offensive) and how to use it appropriately (or not at
 all)
 Spell words correctly
 Use monolingual and bilingual dictionaries and thesauruses to expand vocabulary
 Keep a personal dictionary or vocabulary book to expand vocabulary

Sentence construction
 Write simple and compound sentences
 Use conjunctions to join clauses in compound sentences: e.g. and, but, or, so, then, yet
 25 | P a g e
 Punctuation
 Know and be able to use the following punctuation marks appropriately and accurately: full stop, comma,
 colon, semi-colon, hyphen, dash, apostrophe, question mark, exclamation mark, brackets, quotation marks

Paragraph writing
 Write paragraphs that are logically sequenced

Register
 Use an appropriate register.

Text types – structure and language features

The tables below describe the range of text types that learners should be taught to write in Grades 7 - 9; other
texts could also be included where appropriate.

Creative texts
 Text type Purpose Text structure Language features
 Narrative To entertain Logical development of paragraph Written in the first or third
 person
 Written in the past or
 present tense
 Events described
 sequentially
 Could make use of dialogue
 Descriptive To describe Description: e.g. What is happening in a May be written in present
 something picture tense
 Creates a picture in words
 Uses adjectives, adverbs

Longer and Shorter Transactional texts
 Text type Purpose Text structure Language features
 Diary entries To record Usually written in a special book (a diary Usually written in present
 personal or a journal) / past / future tense
 experience / plan Entries written regularly (e.g. daily or Informal in style but not
 ahead weekly) offensive
 Entries dated The writer is writing for
 him or herself
 Friendly To inform and Address, date and salutation Usually informal in style
 letter maintain a Structure of message will vary depending Language features will
 relationship on purpose (e.g. describing your family vary according to purpose
 or house of message
 Closing, signature
 Dialogue Communication Introduction and conclusion Punctuation
 Specific features of dialogue Direct speech
 Question words
 Present or Future tense
 Invitation To invite May take the form of a personal letter or Can be formal or informal
 cards someone to an use an invitation card. Includes: in style
 event or to do Nature of the event Generally concise - brief
 something Where it will take place and to the point
 Date and time
 May include dress code
 Name of invitee
 May include RSVP
 May have a visual, design element
 Postcard / To inform and Salutation, address or email format Simple present / future
 Message / communicate tense / past tenses

 26 | P a g e
 Email

Texts for enrichment

 Text type Purpose Text structure Language features
 For Various e.g. to Will vary according to the purpose e.g. The person completing the
 enrichment: apply for a Name, Address, Age, School form should be concise,
 Filling in forms library card accurate, formal, neat
 (writing should be legible)

 Flyer To persuade Small size e.g. A5 paper Speaks directly to the
 someone to buy Eye-catching headline reader
 something or Brief description of product Concise language
 use a service List of benefits or offers Language used to create an
 Contact information e.g. website Impact on the reader e.g.
 May have a visual, design element adverbs, adjectives
 Advertisement To persuade Can take a variety of forms Impact on the reader e.g.
 someone to buy Usually have a visual, design element adverbs, adjectives
 something or Use advertising techniques Use of punctuation
 use a service Use design to make the advertisement
 eye-catching and memorable
 Giving To describe or Logical set of instructions to achieve a Written in the imperative
 instructions, instruct how purpose. e.g. Turn right at the shop
 directions and something is In chronological order e.g.
 rules done through a First …. next … (d’abord –
 series of ensuite)
 sequenced steps Use of numbers and bullet
 points to signal order

Length of written texts to be produced

 Texts Grades Disjunctive Conjunctive
 orthography orthography

 Paragraphs: narrative and descriptive 7 70-100 words 30 - 50 words
 8 90-120 words 50 - 70 words
 9 110-140 words 70 - 90 words

 Longer Transactional texts: Friendly letters / 7-9 70 - 90 words 50 - 70 words (content
 dialogue (content only) only)

 Shorter transactional texts: Advertisements/ 7-9 40 – 60 words 30 – 40 words (content
 Diary entries/ Postcards/ Invitation cards/ (content only) only)
 Filling in forms/ Directions/ Instructions/
 Flyers/ Posters/ emails / message

 3.4 Language structures and conventions – reference list
 The following language structures will be taught in the context of reading and writing, and also as part of a
 systematic grammar programme. Some of the structures will have been introduced in earlier grades but may
 still need to be revised.

 NB: The unique features of the language must be taken into consideration. As a result, only features
 applicable to a specific language should be given attention in the text below.
 Nouns / Noms Number (singular and plural) e.g. la chaise/les chaises ; le chapeau/les chapeaux
 Countable nouns, e.g. un livre/des livres

 27 | P a g e
 Nouns with no change in spelling in the plural form e.g. le pays/les pays
 Gender (masculine and feminine) e.g. la fille/le garçon; la peur/le problème
 Common (e.g. la femme) and proper nouns (e.g. Damien)
 Abstract nouns e.g. l'amour, la paix, le respect
 Showing material e.g. Le complément du nom (en/de) + matière (un pain de
 savon, un pull en laine)
 Showing use, capacity e.g. le complément du nom (à/de) - l'usage, la
 contenance (une boîte à bijoux, une barquette de fruits)
 Showing possession e.g. le complément du nom avec "de" - l'appartenance
 e.g. le pupitre de Lesego, les jouets des enfants
 Collective nouns : e.g. un groupe de pèlerins, un tas de pierres, une rangée de
 meubles, une série d’exercices
Determiners/ Indefinite article: un livre, une pomme
déterminants Definite article: le livre, la chemise, les pommes
 Demonstrative adjectives: ce, cet, cette, ces.
 Partitive article : la quantité indéterminée: du / de la/ des …
 L'article "zéro" : être + profession e.g. Il est ingénieur
 Quantity 1 : la quantité déterminée (e.g. un kilo de/beaucoup de/peu de
 chaque/ tout(e) le (la)/tout(e)s les)/la plupart)
 Quantity 2: comparaison (e.g. moins de / autant de)
 Quantity 3: quantité zéro (e.g. aucun, pas de)

Pronouns / Personal pronouns as subject: je, tu, il/elle, nous, vous ils/elles (e.g. Elle lit le
pronoms roman.)
 Personal pronouns as direct or indirect object : pronoms COD et COI : me, te,
 nous, vous, le, la, les, lui, leur (e.g. Elle me l'a donné.)
 Reflexive pronouns: pronoms réfléchis : me, te, se, nous, vous, se (e.g. Il s'est
 lavé.)
 Relative pronouns: pronoms relatifs : qui, que, dont (e.g. L'homme qui regarde
 par la fenêtre est mon professeur.)
 Interrogative pronouns: pronoms interrogatifs ; où, quand, combien, quel/quelle,
 qui (e.g. Quand allez-vous rentrer?)

Adjectives / Position of adjectives : place et accord des adjectifs e.g. le vieil homme, la
adjectifs vieille église, le chien intelligent
 Adjectives gender: e.g. curieux/curieuse ; amusant/amusante
 Demonstratives: ce, cet, cette, ces (e.g. Ces livres sont intéressants.)
 Possessives : mon, ma, mes etc. (Ma chemise est sale)
 Adjectifs indéfinis : tout/toute/tous/toutes (e.g. Toutes les fleurs sont belles.)
 Adjectifs interrogatifs : quel e.g. Quelle est ta décision?
 Comparison of adjectives e.g. bon, meilleur, le meilleur/ la meilleure / les
 meilleurs / les meilleures ; intelligent(e), plus intelligent(e), le/la plus intelligent(e)
 (e.g. C'était la journée la plus belle de ma vie.)

Adverbs / Adverbs of manner e.g. tranquillement, avec attention, poliment, doucement, vite
adverbes Adverbs of time e.g. hier, demain, ensuite, enfin, premièrement, maintenant, ce
 matin
 Adverbs of frequency e.g. toujours, parfois, d'habitude, quelquefois, jamais,

 28 | P a g e
 souvent
 Adverbs of probability e.g. certainement, absolument, peut-être, éventuellement
 Adverbs of duration e.g. toujours, encore, plus, pendant, depuis, dans, il y a
 Adverbs of degree e.g. très, trop, assez, complètement
 Adverbs of place e.g. près, loin, à côté, en face
 Adverbs of cause, consequence, oppostion e.g. donc, puisque, comme, alors,
 pourtant

Prepositions/ Place and direction e.g. au-dessous de, au-dessus de, sur, sous, à, entre,
prépositions derrière
 Adjective + preposition e.g. peur de, honte de, fâché contre, intéressé à
 Noun + preposition e.g. invitation à, décision de, raison pour, difficile de, facile à
 Verbs followed by prepositions e.g. commencer à, essayer de, arrêter de, dire à,

Interjections Exclamations e.g. Ah! Ben! Ouf! Bof! Aie!
 La phrase exclamative : quel, que, comme… ! e.g. Quelle insolence!

Conjunctions / Coordinating conjunctions : e.g. mais, et, ou… ou…, soit…. soit….
Conjonctions

Verbs/ verbes Transitive and intransitive verbs e.g. Il a acheté un stylo./La jeune fille est partie.
 Gerundive : le gérondif de manière, de condition, de simultanéité e.g. Il est entré
 en courant.
 Verb with objects direct and indirect e.g. Il a donné le livre à Pierre.

Verb tenses/ Simple present tense e.g. Je joue au tennis./Les jeunes adorent les portraits
les temps numériques.
verbaux Present progressive: être en train de + infinitive e.g. Elle est en train
 d'apprendre le français.
 Present tense with DEPUIS e.g. J'habite à Durban depuis mon enfance.
 Simple past tense e.g. Il s'est réveillé.
 Past progressive (or continuous) tense (imparfait de l'indicatif) e.g. La famille
 dormait, lorsque le cambrioleur est entré dans la maison.
 Expressing future time:
 Going to + infinitive (Futur proche) e.g. Ils vont voir leurs cousins / Je crois qu'Il
 va pleuvoir demain.
 Simple future tense (futur simple) e.g. Nous irons à Paris la semaine prochaine.
 La concordance des temps : l'antériorité, la simultanéité, la postériorité

Concord Subject-verb agreement e.g. Il vient d'arriver./Je pars demain./J'allais à l'école. /
 Ils allaient au travail.
 Past participle agreement : l'accord du participe passé avec le sujet (auxiliaire
 être) e.g. Elle est restée.

Modals / To express ability/inability e.g. Il peut résoudre le problème.
modalisation To express permission e.g. Puis-je aller aux toilettes?
 To express instructions/requests: Pouvez-vous ouvrir la fenêtre, s'Il vous plaît?
 To express possibility/impossibility e.g. Cela va pouvoir causer des soucis. / Elle
 ne peut pas le savoir.
 To express probability/improbability e.g. Nous devons arriver avant 22h00.
 To express certainty e.g. Ils ont dû certainement oublier./Je suis certain de sa
 bonne foi./Je n'ai aucun doute.

 29 | P a g e
 Conditional First conditional to express a real possibility e.g. S'il pleut, nous n'irons pas à la
sentences / piscine.
hypothèses Second conditional to express something that is unlikely or improbable e.g. Si je
 gagnais au loto, j'irais sur la lune.
 Third conditional to express something that is hypothetical, regret e.g. Si j'avais
 étudié plus assidûment, j'aurais réussi mon Matric.

Passive and Present tense e.g. La porte est fermée à clé chaque soir à 18h00.
active voice/ e.g. La porte est fermée en ce moment.
la voix passive e.g. Il est aimé par sa femme.
et la voix active
 Progressive present : être en train de + infinitive e.g. La porte est en train
 d'être fermée.
 Past perfect tense e.g. Un nouveau supermarché a été ouvert cette année.
 Simple past tense e.g. La bibliothèque était ouverte pendant les vacances.
 Future time e.g. L'année prochaine notre nouvelle bibliothèque va être
 construite/ sera construite.
 Subjonctif e.g. Je veux que la tarte soit faite par Anne.

Reported
 Reported questions e.g. Elle m’a demandé pourquoi j’étais si en retard./Il m’a
speech /
discours demandé quel type de musique j’aimais.
rapporté Subordinate clauses e.g. Elle a dit qu’elle ne savait pas./Il m’a dit qu’il avait
 perdu le livre.

Sentence
 Statement e.g. Oui, il va au cinéma.
structures / la
 Questions e.g. Il va au cinéma ? Est-ce qu’il va au cinéma ?
structure de la
phrase Negatives e.g. Il ne va pas au cinéma.
 Command/imperative e.g. Allons au cinéma ! Ne fais pas cela !

Spelling / Spelling patterns, spelling rules and conventions, abbreviations, acronyms
orthographe E.g. apt., M., dir., fém.
 E.g. DOM, BAN, RIB, SNCF

Vocabulary Synonyms e.g. Envoyer/lancer
development Antonym e.g. grand vs petit
and figurative
 La nominalisation e.g. exploser – une explosion
language /
développement Figures of speech: analogie, métaphore, personnification, contraste, sarcasme,
du lexique et chute, jeu de mots
de la langue Enrichment : oxymore, metonymie, onomatopée, hyperbole, symbole, paradoxe,
figurée litote, synecdoque

 Idiomatic expressions/idioms e.g. les doigts dans le nez, tomber dans les
 pommes

 Proverbs e.g. À l’impossible nul n’est tenu.

 Borrowed words

 baby-foot, best-seller, blazer, blue-jean, blues, boycott, break, caddie, cafétéria,
 cardigan, charter, chewing-gum, chips, cross-country, hamburger, import-export,
 jackpot, job, jogging, ketchup, laser, lift, match, média,microphone, mile, miss,

 30 | P a g e
 modern style, mohair, moleskin, morse, play-back.

Punctuation / Trait d'union, deux-points, point-virgule, apostrophe, guillemets, parenthèses, ellipses, points
ponctuation d'exclamation, points d'interrogation, virgule

 31 | P a g e
 3.5 TEACHING PLANS

This document suggests that each cycle will include one or more units focused on each of the skills: listening,
speaking, reading, viewing, writing, presenting and language. Each cycle will provide activities for learners to
study, read or view a series of oral, written and visual texts. In each cycle the activities would draw learners’
attention to correct grammar and text types. Over a year, approximately 18 of these cycles would cover all
aspects of the curriculum in 36 weeks. In addition, the level of difficulty in all areas would increase from term
to term and year to year in the Senior Phase. Progression therefore also becomes part of the organizing of
learning programmes. This structure gives learners and teachers the opportunity to build context, to consolidate
vocabulary, and to become familiar with language structures over two weeks before moving on to other skills.
At the same time it offers variety and can be tailored to the interests of a group. For example, “Clothes” is a
common teaching theme, but could be followed by a cycle on weather.

Integrated language teaching: the teaching cycle

In practice, integration suggests variety: variety of forms, of activities, of texts and themes (see Suggested
Themes – Reference List below). When designing an integrated two-week cycle, the teacher may cluster
activities around a topic e.g. Sport. The sequence of lessons in a two-week cycle can follow any order, e.g. a
cycle might start with reading, and progress to role play (speaking) which is followed by writing. Any text can
be used for the activities outlined below.

The teacher should choose a literary text for study. This may be poems, a short novel, a short story or a short
drama (see “Texts used for integrated teaching of language skills.”) The teacher may choose to teach any order
for teaching texts. If the teacher chooses a longer continuous text such as short novel or short drama it is
suggested that it is taught continuously so that learners do not forget details of the message. If a short novel or
short drama is chosen, the teacher will need to divide the text into as many units as there is time available.
Additional sections of the work will be read as homework or part of the extended reading.

This curriculum presents an explicit grammar focus. In practice language will take about an hour every two
weeks, with half taught in context with writing and reading, and half taught explicitly. In addition to planned
grammar teaching there will be remedial teaching or revision of language drawn from learners’ writing errors.

 Suggested Themes – Reference List
  Animals  House
  Body  Likes and dislikes
  Clothes  Music
  Colours  Nature/environment
  Days and Months  Places
  Emotions  School
  Family  Sport
  Food  Time
  Greetings  Transport
  Hobbies  Weather and seasons

 32 | P a g e
 Turning the Teaching Plan into teaching and learning activities

An example based on TEACHING PLAN Grade 7, Term 1, Weeks 1 and 2 (6 x 40 minute lessons) = 4 hours
teaching

 GRADE 7 TERM 1
 Skills Listening & Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking 1 hour 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and
 explicit)
 Listening for Reading for Creative: A few simple adjectives
 specific comprehension on Descriptive paragraph (e.g. grand/grande;
 information: a word and petit/petite; gros/grosse)
 sentence level: e.g. Write a descriptive Use of the simple
 Teach features of paragraph present tense
 listening for E.g. Dialogues e.g. Je me couche./Ils
 information between people Introduce process writing arrivent.
 greeting each other stages:
 Class listens to e.g. a for the first time,  Planning Vocabulary in context
 recording of a asking who they are  Drafting
1 and 2

 dialogue on meeting and how they are  Proofreading
 and greeting doing  Editing and
 rewriting
 Informal speaking:  Presenting
 Class practise to Write sentences practising
 meet and greet in how to introduce and
 pairs describe someone to
 others – then make a
 descriptive paragraph
 using these sentences in a
 logical order.

 33 | P a g e
 Cycle theme: Meeting and greeting

Lesson 1: (Mainly listening and speaking)
  Introduction: Greet class and introduce yourself. Teach learners how to introduce themselves.
  Vocabulary relevant to the theme.
  Teach features of listening for information

Lesson 2: (Mainly listening and speaking)
  Listen various times to a dialogue of people greeting each other.
  Learners practise in pairs to meet and greet.

Lesson 3: (Mainly reading)
  View pictures, titles and headings of dialogues.
  Learners read silently, after which teacher repeats reading aloud, while learners try to understand
 dialogues.
  Teacher explains grammar and vocabulary
  Homework: Learners reread the dialogues and answer questions, e.g. true / false.

Lesson 4: (Mixed)
  Some integrated grammar features of the text
  Explain the writing process
  Learners read examples of descriptive paragraphs
  Homework: Learners practise writing simple sentences introducing and describing someone, using
 grammar as explained.

Lesson 5: (Mainly writing)
  Learners write the descriptive paragraph

Lesson 6: (Writing)
  Learners edit and rewrite the first draft of their paragraph

 On the following pages Teaching Plans are provided for each of grades 7, 8 and 9. Please note that
 these are only EXAMPLES of how to organise the teaching of the Second Additional Language over
 the period of a year.

 34 | P a g e
 3.5.1 Spread of texts table

 Weeks Grade 7 Grade 8 Grade 9
 Term 1
 1&2 Information text e.g. Information text e.g. Dialogue
 dialogue dialogue
 3&4 Song or poem Rhyme, song, poem Rhyme, poem/song

 5&6 Information text: Information text e.g. Information text – filling in
 visual, e.g. calendar pictures a form
 7&8 Information text: Visual text, e.g. Visual text - pictures
 dialogue pictures, cartoon
 9&10 Reading text Information text Information text –
 dialogue/speech
 Term 2
 1&2 Information text: Information text e.g. picture Instruction, e.g. giving
 dialogue Short story/folklore direction
 3&4 Information text, e.g. Information text e.g. Information text, e.g. giving
 map schedule/ diary/ timetable direction
 5&6 Information text: Information text e.g. Information text – Weather
 visuals pictures report, map, poem, song
 7&8 Poem or song Information text e.g. games Information text – Weather
 and dialogue report, map, poem, song
 9&10 SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

 Term 3
 1&2 Transactional text, Vocabulary text Comprehension and reading
 e.g. letter text
 3&4 Visual text, e.g. Instructional text, e.g. recipe Visual text
 picture dialogue
 5&6 Information text, e.g. Information text e.g. Visual text
 dialogue radio/TV programme
 7&8 Information text, e.g. Information text e.g. Information text, e.g.
 map dialogue dialogue, pictures
 Poem, short story,
 novel or drama
 9&10 Story, poems, songs, Short story / poems / songs / Short story/songs/ drama/
 cartoon, drama and short drama / short novel novel/poem
 novel
 Term 4
 1&2 Visual text Vocabulary text Visual text

 3&4 Information text poem / song / story Information text, e.g.
 dialogue
 5&6 Information text Visual text, poem Vocabulary text

 35 | P a g e
 7&8 Song, poem Creative and transactional Song, poem
 texts

9&10 SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

 36 | P a g e
 3.5.1.1 Grade 7

 GRADE 7 TERM 1
 Skills Listening & Reading & Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking Viewing 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and
 explicit)
 Listening for Reading for Creative: A few simple adjectives
 specific comprehension on Descriptive paragraph
 information: a word and Use of the simple
 sentence level: Introduce process writing present tense
 Teach features of stages: e.g. Je suis…. / Je
 listening for E.g. Dialogues  Planning m’appelle….
 information between people  Drafting
 greeting each other  Proofreading Vocabulary in context
 Class listens to e.g. a for the first time,  Editing and
 recording of a asking who they are rewriting e.g. Bonjour, comment
 1 and 2

 dialogue on meeting and how they are  Presenting allez-vous ?
 and greeting doing
 Write a descriptive
 Informal speaking: paragraph
 Class practise to Write sentences practising
 meet and greet in how to introduce and
 pairs describe one to others –
 then make a descriptive
 paragraph using these
 sentences in a logical
 order.
 Listen for Literary text: Longer Transactional: Direct speech
 appreciation: Interrogatives
 Read poem / song Punctuation
 Listen to a song / e.g. the same as Introduce process writing Introduce new verb(s)
 poem of the used in listening for stages: e.g. être et avoir
 alphabet. Use this to comprehension  Planning
 spell certain words and appreciation  Drafting Remedial grammar
 3 and 4

 that they can record  Proofreading from learners’ writing
 as part of a listening  Editing and rewriting
 comprehension.  Presenting Vocabulary in context

 Formal Speaking: Write a dialogue
 E.g. Role play on
 meeting and
 greeting

 37 | P a g e
 Skills Listening & Reading & Writing & Language structures and
 Speaking Viewing Presenting conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and explicit)

 Listening for Reading for Creative text:
 information and comprehension Nouns
 comprehension: at a word and E.g. Make own un/une/des and “le/la/l’/les with
 sentence level: timetable in target nouns.
 E.g. the days of language / Fill in a e.g. le français, les mathematiques
 the week, months Introduce form according to
 of the year and features of visual listening exercise
 numbers. text Verbs
 Telling Time
 Information to be View and discuss e.g. Quelle heure est-il ? /Il est 5
 filled in a form various visual heures./Il est 3 heures et demie./Il
 e.g. a calendar, texts e.g. a est midi et quart.
5 and 6

 Days of the picture,
 week, photograph Vocabulary in context
 Months of the
 year E.g. View a
 school timetable
 Informal
 Speaking and and
 group work:
 E.g. read a text
 Groups ask each on the theme
 other questions “School”
 and answers
 using e.g. a
 visual text such
 as a calendar
 Listening for Reading for Creative:
 comprehension comprehension: Verbs
 E.g. Write sentences aimer, détester, adorer, préférer
 E.g. listen to a E.g. Read a text using the vocabulary
 dialogue of of learners in context. Write a Adjectives
 learners expressing their dialogue about the beau, bon, joli
 expressing which favourite subjects subjects they prefer.
 subjects they like Remedial grammar from learners’
 / dislike and writing
7 and 8

 Formal E.g. Answer Vocabulary in context:
 speaking and comprehension e.g. Moi, je préfère les maths parce
 presenting: questions on the que c’est
 text. facile/intéressant/amusant/pratique !
 E.g. Learners Je déteste l’informatique parce que
 introduce c’est nul/difficile/ennuyeux !
 themselves and
 say which
 subjects they
 prefer

 38 | P a g e
 Listening for Reading for Creative / Verbs, adjectives
 appreciation / comprehension: Transactional:
 specific Simple conjunctions
 information: E.g. Read a text E.g. Sentence writing et, parce que, alors
 on chosen theme /
 E.g. Listening Label pictures on the Reinforcement of grammar covered
 comprehension chosen theme and in first term.
 on chosen theme explain the preferred
 picture Remedial grammar from learners’
 Informal writing
9 and 10

 Speaking and
 group work: Vocabulary: in context

 E.g. Saying why
 they like a
 certain subject

 or

 Prepared reading
 aloud of text on
 e.g. chosen
 theme
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1
 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Oral: Listening Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 1: Comprehension and
comprehension / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Language
Prepared Speaking / Transactional (Shorter or
Prepared Reading longer) text
aloud

 39 | P a g e
 GRADE 7 TERM 2
 Skills Listening & Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking 1 h.our 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour (integrated
 and explicit)
 Listening for Reading for Shorter Transactional: Prepositions
 specific information comprehension on sur, sous, dans,
 sentence level: Process writing stages: devant, derrière, entre
 E.g. Listen to a  Planning
 dialogue of learners E.g. Read dialogues  Drafting Punctuation
 saying where they between people  Proofreading Basic Conjunctions
 come from coming from  Editing and et, mais
 different places / rewriting
1 and 2

 Speaking for countries  Presenting Negatives
 specific purposes / ne … pas
 Formal speaking E.g. Learners write a
 and presenting narrative paragraph to tell Vocabulary in context
 (Prepared Reading where they come from e.g. Je ne suis pas
 aloud) australien(ne). Je suis
 sud-africain(e).
 E.g. Prepared Je viens de
 Reading aloud on the Johannesburg
 chosen theme

 Listening for Reading for Short Transactional: Remedial grammar
 specific comprehension on from learners’ writing
 information: word and sentence E.g. Writing for a specific
 level: purpose Adjectives
 E.g. use visual text
 such as a map to E.g. Read a text in Process of writing a
 listen to, ask and which nationalities of prepared speech. Punctuation
 answer questions. different people are Basic Conjunctions
 evident. Process writing stages:
 Formal speaking  Planning Prepositions
 and presenting:  Drafting à, en, au, à la, aux
  Proofreading
 Discuss the features  Editing and e.g. Je vais à Paris en
 of prepared speech rewriting France./Je suis à
  Presenting Dakar au
 Senegal./J’habite à
3 and 4

 Prepared speech Johannesburg en
 Afrique du sud.

 Negatives

 Vocabulary in context
 Les pays : la France,
 l’Afrique du sud, le
 Portugal, le Canada,
 les Etats-Unis

 40 | P a g e
 Listening for Intensive reading of Creative: Imperative
 specific Visual Texts: Écoute !/Écoutez !
 information: E.g. Parle !/Parlez !
 Listening View and interpret Draft a descriptive Réponds !/Répondez !
 Comprehension the features of e.g. a paragraph on a chosen Écris !/Écrivez !
 picture of the picture, following the Lève-toi !/Levez-vous!
 Informal speaking classroom process writing approach –
 group activity Present Tense
 Informal Speaking: New verbs
 E.g. classroom travailler, écouter,
 discussion on parler, chanter,
 interpretation of regarder, jouer
 pictures
 Il y a …
 e.g. Il y a trente élèves
 dans la classe.
5 and 6

 Remedial grammar
 from learners’ writing
 e.g. Les livres sont
 SUR la chaise./Voici
 ma classe.

 Vocabulary in context
 e.g. la salle de classe,
 un/une élève, le
 professeur, le TBI/le
 tableau noir, la table,
 le cahier, le livre, la
 bibliothèque, la
 fenêtre, la porte, la
 chaise

 41 | P a g e
 Listening for Reading for Shorter Transactional: Negative
 appreciation: comprehension:
 E.g. Write a descriptive Articles: un/une/des ;
 E.g. listen to a poem / Read a text based on paragraph about their le/la/les
 song dedicated to a a family or family family
 family relationships Plurals
 Process writing stages: le cousin/les cousins
 Informal speaking  Planning un frère/des frères
 and group work:  Drafting
  Proofreading Abbreviations
 E.g.  Editing and
 Discuss their family rewriting Possessives
  Presenting mon, ma, mes, ton, ta,
 te, etc.

 Identify and reinforce
7 and 8

 the different language
 structures and
 conventions.
 Voici ma mère./Voici
 mon père et voici mes
 sœurs.

 Remedial grammar
 from learners’ writing

 Vocabulary in context
 la famille : le père (le
 papa), la mère (la
 maman), la sœur, le
 frère, la grand-mère,
 le grand-père, l’oncle,
 la tante, le cousin, la
 cousine
9 and 10

 Mid-year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2
 Task 4 Task 5 Task 6

Oral: Listening comprehension Literature: Contextual questions Mid-year examinations:
/ Prepared Speaking / Prepared Comprehension, language,
Reading aloud literature and writing

 42 | P a g e
 GRADE 7 TERM 3
Skills Listening & Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking 1 hour 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour (integrated
 and explicit)
 Listening for Intensive reading of Longer Transactional: Prepositions.
 appreciation text for Au, à, à la, aux, en
 comprehension on Introduce and discuss the
 E.g. Listen to sounds paragraph level features of writing a
 around a theme e.g. friendly letter / note / email Word order
 transport E.g. Read text on / narrative / descriptive Articles
 specific theme and paragraph Present Tense
 Formal speaking answer e.g. Je voyage en
 and presenting comprehension Write a friendly letter / train./Je vais à Paris
 questions note / email / narrative / en avion.
 Prepared Reading descriptive paragraph on
 aloud with focus on And e.g. Where I am going Salutation for friendly
 fluency, today letter / note / email
 pronunciation and Example of a friendly e.g. Bonjour
1 and 2

 tone letter or paragraph Focus on process writing: Paul/Pauline
 e.g. text on theme  Planning Cher Paul
  Drafting Chère Pauline
  Proofreading ….
  Editing and rewriting e.g. to end off letter
  Presenting or note :
 Bises/À bientôt
 Liliane

 Vocabulary in context
 aujourd’hui, ce soir,
 ce weekend
 Transport modes: en
 train, à vélo, en
 autobus, en car, etc.

 Listening for Reading for Longer Transactional: Possessives
 interaction: comprehension: (continue) Prepositions.
 devant, sur, sous, à
 E.g. Listen to text / E.g. Viewing visual Introduce and discuss the côté de, entre
 questions related to text on the theme for features of writing a
 visual stimulus e.g. comprehension and friendly letter / note / email Word order
 Où est le chien ? answer questions. / narrative / descriptive Articles
 paragraph Present Tense
 Informal Speaking
 and group work: Write a friendly letter / Salutation for friendly
3 and 4

 note / email narrative / letter / note / email
 E.g. Responding to descriptive paragraph on
 oral questions related e.g. Où je vais aujourd’hui Vocabulary in context
 to visual stimulus à la banque, aux
 Focus on process writing: magasins, à la
  Planning piscine, au parc
  Drafting
  Proofreading
  Editing and rewriting
  Presenting

 43 | P a g e
 Listening for Intensive reading of Creative: Adjectives
 comprehension Visual Texts:
 Make sentences with new Interrogatives
 E.g. listen to acoustic View picture on vocabulary New verbs and nouns
 impulses chosen theme – e.g. Spelling
 the city And
 And Remedial grammar
 Write a descriptive from learners’ writing
 Listen to a dialogue paragraph on e.g. a picture
5 and 6

 on a new theme e.g. based on theme Vocabulary in context
 Ma ville…; J’habite e.g. Ma ville est très
 ici… petite./Dans mon
 Focus on process writing: quartier il y a une
 Informal Speaking  Planning grande piscine et des
 and group work:  Drafting jardins.
  Proofreading
 E.g. Use vocabulary  Editing and rewriting
 of new theme, speak  Presenting
 about the acoustic
 impulses and practise
 saying sentences
 Listening for Reading for Creative: New verbs and nouns
 information comprehension on Numbers
 paragraph level Label a map and write Spelling
 E.g. Listen to identify sentences using new Plurals
 different countries of E.g. Peer reading of vocabulary. Prepositions
 the world / provinces descriptive Describe a place of interest Articles
 in South Africa paragraphs written in in the map and how one
 previous cycle (for may access it, for example, Remedial grammar
7 and 8

 Informal Speaking enjoyment) means of transport, from learners’ writing
 landmarks and tourist
 Role play on theme or attraction areas. Vocabulary in context
 e.g. different le Gauteng, le Cap
 countries of the world Literary text
 / provinces in South
 Africa E.g. Reading for
 enjoyment e.g. poem/
 short story / short
 drama / short novel

 44 | P a g e
 Listening for Literary text Creative: Reinforcing all
 appreciation grammar done this
 E.g. Read story / E.g. Write captions for a term
 E.g. Listening to part poems / songs / picture story based on
 of / complete story / cartoon / short drama theme and language Vocabulary in context
 poems / songs / / short novel and covered to reinforce
 cartoon / short drama respond to grammar learned
 / short novel comprehension throughout the term.
 questions
 Reading aloud
9 and 10

 Work on e.g.
 pronunciation,
 intonation, pace,
 fluency and body
 language

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3
 Task 7 Task 8 Task 9

Oral: Listening comprehension / Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 2: Comprehension and
Prepared Speaking / Prepared Descriptive) paragraph(s) / language OR
Reading aloud Transactional (Shorter or longer) text) Literature: Contextual questions

 GRADE 7 TERM 4
 Skills Listening & Reading & Writing & Presenting Language
 Speaking Viewing 1 hour structures and
 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated
 and explicit)
 Listening for Intensive reading Creative:
 comprehension of Visual Texts: Negative
 Practise question and answer Adjectives and
 Listen to a View and read sentences on the selected adverbs
 dialogue e.g. on a pictures on the theme. Possessives
 new theme – my theme e.g. different Spelling
 body/Mon corps body parts Label pictures used. Plurals

 Informal Longer Transactional: Vocabulary in
1 and 2

 Speaking Write a letter to your friend context
 what you have learnt e.g. how le pied, la main, le
 Respond to to take care of my body bras, etc.
 questions after
 viewing and Focus on process writing: Verbs : se laver, se
 reading Visual  Planning brosser les
 Text  Drafting cheveux, se
  Proofreading brosser les dents,
  Editing and rewriting etc.
  Presenting

 45 | P a g e
 Listening for Reading for Transactional: Remedial grammar
 specific comprehension from learners’
 information Write e.g. a prepared speech writing
 E.g. Reading of on “My body”/ “Mon Negative
 E.g. Listening learners’ written corps…” Interrogatives
 comprehension on paragraphs Conjunctions
 theme selected in Articles
 previous cycle. Or Adjectives and
 adverbs
 Formal Speaking E.g. A selected text Possessives
 and presenting: on the theme Spelling
 Plurals
3 and 4

 E.g. Prepared
 speech written in Vocabulary in
 this and previous context
 cycle. e.g. Je mange/Je
 parle avec ma
 bouche.
 Je regarde avec
 mes yeux.
 Je danse avec mes
 jambes et mes bras.

 Remedial grammar
 from learners’
 writing

 46 | P a g e
 Listening for Intensive reading Creative: Interrogatives
 specific of Visual Texts:
 information E.g. Learners draw own
 Learners view and pictures in different colours, Adjectives: bleu,
 E.g. Learners listen read text e.g. a label them and then rouge, orange,
 for new vocabulary picture of different practise writing sentences jaune, vert, rose,
 by using a visual colours and dialogue which describe the picture . etc.
 text - Introduce on the same theme
 new theme e.g. And NB colour
 colours adjectives follow
 E.g. Write a descriptive the noun e.g. un
 Informal paragraph to describe a livre bleu, une robe
 Speaking multicoloured picture. rouge
 Spelling
 Practise saying Focus on process writing:
 questions and  Planning Plurals
 answers e.g. De  Drafting le livre jaune/les
5 and 6

 quelle couleur est  Proofreading livres jaunes
 le livre ?  Editing and rewriting
  Presenting Present Tense
 Negatives
 Demonstratives
 Possessives

 Vocabulary in
 context
 e.g. J’aime le
 rouge !/Je n’aime
 pas le gris !/Ma
 couleur préférée
 c’est le violet !

 Remedial grammar
 from learners’
 writing

 Listening for Reading for Examination preparation. Revise sentence
 appreciation comprehension constructions and
 Reinforce the process of language
 E.g. Listen to a E.g. Text selected writing in different text types conventions learnt
 song / poem / on theme with such as dialogues, descriptive /
 descriptive comprehension narrative paragraphs Remedial grammar
 paragraphs written questions to be from learners’
7 and 8

 by learners in answered writing
 previous cycle
 Vocabulary in
 Informal speaking context

 E.g. Reinforcement
 of the questions
 and sentences done
 orally this term
9 and 10

 End of year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 4

 47 | P a g e
 Task 10

End of year examinations
Paper 1: *Orals
Paper 2: Language in context, Literature and Writing

*Oral: Oral year mark from cumulative speaking, listening and reading. Final mark should include at least one
prepared speaking task, one listening task and one prepared reading aloud.

 48 | P a g e
 3.5.1.2 Grade 8

 GRADE 8 TERM 1
 Skills Listening & Reading & Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking Viewing 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and
 explicit)
 Listening for Reading for Shorter transactional Sentence structure
 interaction and comprehension: text: (Subject – verb - object),
 dialogue: Information Common
 Teach features of filling communicative phrases.
 E.g. Listen to e.g. read a dialogue in forms. Questions words
 dialogue between between two people Express basic feelings.
 two people and answer some E.g. Fill in a form with Use of the simple
 basic information emanating present tense
1 and 2

 Informal speaking comprehension from listening exercise. Vocabulary from texts
 and group work: questions. Personal pronouns
 Update personal Positive / negative
 Pupils identify Use dictionary to dictionary by writing in Concord
 questions and look up new words. new nouns and verbs. Spelling
 answers in the Punctuation
 dialogue and then Singular / plural
 practice them in Nouns and verbs
 pairs
 Use of personal
 dictionary
 Listen for Literary text 1: Longer transactional Sentence structure
 appreciation: text: (Subject – verb - object),
 E.g. Read rhyme(s) Common
 Listen to a rhyme / / poem(s) / song(s) Revise features of the communicative phrases.
 song / poem for comprehension dialogue / descriptive / Questions words
 and appreciation narrative paragraph Express basic feelings.
 Informal Speaking Use of the simple
 and group work: Answer basic Write a dialogue / present tense
 questions on the descriptive / narrative Vocabulary from texts
 E.g. Memorise above text/s. paragraph with given dealt with
 rhyme / song and information e.g. Personal Personal pronouns
 present it in groups Use bilingual details of two characters. Positive / negative
 or pairs. dictionary to look Concord
3 and 4

 up new words. (could be assessed) Spelling
 Pupils work on Punctuation
 pronunciation, tone, Introduce process writing Singular / plural
 rhythm, etc. stages: Remedial grammar from
  Planning learners’ writing / form
  Drafting filling.
  Proofreading
  Editing and Use of personal
 rewriting dictionary
  Presenting

 Update personal
 dictionary

 49 | P a g e
 Skills Listening & Reading & Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking Viewing 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and
 explicit)
 Listening for Reading for Short transactional / Introduction of new
 information and comprehension at Creative text: vocabulary: e.g.
 interaction: a word and emotions and feelings :
 sentence level: E.g. learners complete a triste, content(e),
 E.g. Learners listen dialogue by filling in the heureux (heureuse),
 to audio or teacher E.g. Read sentences missing parts. Focus on malheureux
 describing the related to feelings using language and new (malheureuse),
 feelings of different and emotions. vocabulary covered, e.g. occupé(e)
 people. Pupils listen like expressing emotions.
 and try and match Use bilingual Use of personal
 description with a dictionary to look Reinforce the features of a pronouns
 set of pictures up new words. dialogue.
 indicating different Spelling and punctuation
5 and 6

 feelings (sad, happy, Update personal Positive
 busy etc). dictionary. Negative

 (could be assessed) Remedial grammar from
 learners’ writing /
 Informal Speaking dialogue / descriptive /
 and group work: narrative paragraph.

 Learners use
 pictures to ask each
 other how someone
 is feeling. Learners
 respond with new
 vocabulary to
 practice expressing
 feelings / emotions.

 50 | P a g e
 Listening for Intensive reading Creative text:
 appreciation: of Visual Texts:
 Teach features of a Punctuation
 Learners listen to a Introduce features descriptive or narrative Prepositions
 song / poem or of visual text paragraph. Spelling
 rhyme based on a Question words
 new theme. New E.g. Picture / E.g. Learners write a Conjunctive
 vocabulary is cartoon paragraph based on a Present tense positive
 introduced. accompanied by visual text. and negative
 written text.
 Informal speaking Process writing stages: Vocabulary in context
 and group work: Answer
 comprehension  Planning
 Learners read new questions on  Drafting
 words aloud and cartoon / picture.  Proofreading
 practice with a  Editing and
 partner. (could assess) rewriting
7 and 8

  Presenting
 Listening for Use bilingual
 specific dictionary to look Write new words in
 information: up new words. sentences / match
 sentences to visual
 Learners listen to a stimulus / write captions /
 passage for specific label pictures / do a
 information e.g. crossword / fill in
 They listen for personal dictionary.
 words that show
 specific location. (could be assessed)
 Informal speaking
 and group work:

 Learners respond to
 “where” questions
 based on listening to
 the passage.
 Listening for Intensive reading Transactional: Remedial grammar from
 appreciation / for comprehension learners’ completion of
 specific at paragraph level: E.g. Written exercise written paragraphs and
 information: based on current theme exercises.
 E.g. learners read requiring learners to use
 E.g. Listen to each others’ vocabulary and grammar Revise grammar covered
 creative paragraphs paragraphs / an covered during the term. as well as vocabulary.
 in pairs and whole additional text
 class. based on the chosen Update personal
 theme. dictionary.
9 and 10

 Prepared Speaking
 and presenting:

 E.g. learners read
 own paragraphs
 aloud.

 (could be assessed)

 51 | P a g e
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1

 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Oral: Listening Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 1: Comprehension and
comprehension / Prepared Descriptive) paragraph(s) / language
Speaking / Prepared Transactional (Shorter or longer)
Reading aloud text

 52 | P a g e
 GRADE 8 TERM 2
 Skills Listening & Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking 1 hour 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour (integrated
 and explicit)
 Listening for Literary text: Short Transactional:
 appreciation Punctuation
 Reading of simple Writing for a specific Imperative
 E.g. Listen to simple short story / folktale. purpose. Basic Conjunctions
 short story / folktale Prepositions
 Introduce basic E.g. Retelling the story Present tense
 Informal speaking features of short story using pictures as stimulus. Positive
 and group work: / folktale. Negatives
 Process writing stages: Vocabulary in context
 Learners respond  pre-reading  Planning Spelling
 orally to picture story  Drafting Concord
 / questions related to   Proofreading
1 and 2

 reading
 the listening.  Editing and
 Learners can also  post-reading rewriting
 practice reading  Presenting
 aloud.
 Answer questions on (could be assessed)
 story.
 Update personal
 (could be assessed) dictionary.

 Extended reading
 (another short story
 for learners to read
 independently)
 Listening for Intensive reading of Short transactional text:
 specific visual and written Remedial grammar
 information: text: Learners introduced to from learners’ writing
 features of short / retelling
 Listen to new Learners read visual transactional texts.
 vocabulary and text eg. a timetable. Punctuation
 listen to text for They then answer Eg. Learners can write a Imperative
 specific information. questions. diary / list containing Question words
 E.g. A weekly activities planned for the Time words like
 schedule / diary of (could be assessed) coming week. Could use quand, à quelle heure,
3 and 4

 somebody – a school present or future tense. quel jour, etc.
 theme Present tense
 (could be assessed) Future tense
 Informal speaking
 and group work.
 Vocabulary in context
 Learners respond
 orally to questions
 based on the listening
 passage and then
 questions relating to
 themselves.

 53 | P a g e
 Listening for Reading for Transactional: Express likes and
 specific comprehension on dislikes related to new
 information: sentence and E.g. Written exercise theme.
 Listening paragraph level: based on current theme
 Comprehension requiring learners to use Remedial grammar
 Use visual stimulus / new vocabulary and from learners’ writing
 (could be assessed) paragraph as reading grammar covered – the diary / list
 exercise on new school and future tense.
 Formal speaking theme. Answer (integrated grammar and Present / future tense
 and presenting: questions based on writing). e.g. Mardi prochain je
 paragraph. vais aller/je vais faire
5 and 6

 Prepared speech. (could be assessed) du sport.
 Learners talk about (could be assessed)
 what they will do Update personal New time related
 next week. dictionaries. words
 la semaine prochaine,
 le weekend prochain,
 le mois prochain,
 mercredi prochain,
 demain, demain matin,
 demain soir
 Question words

 Vocabulary in context
 Listening for Reading for Creative:
 appreciation / comprehension: Location phrases using
 specific information Learners write a words like entre, à
 / interaction: E.g. Read dialogue descriptive paragraph l’intérieur de, à
 based on current based on visual text. E.g. gauche de, à droite de,
 E.g. pupils listen to a theme and new photograph / picture. derrière etc.
 song introducing new grammar concept.
 vocabulary / play Answer Process writing stages: Question words
 game by listening to comprehension  Planning Plurals
 and carrying out questions.  Drafting Punctuation
 instructions involving  Proofreading
7 and 8

 location phrases. (could be assessed).  Editing and Vocabulary in context
 rewriting
 Informal speaking Use of bilingual  Presenting.
 and group work: dictionary to look up
 new words. (could be assessed)
 Respond orally to
 questions related to Revision – writing of
 visual stimulus. Pair sentences incorporating
 work and whole new vocabulary and
 class. grammar.
 (integrated grammar and
 writing).
9 and 10

 Mid-year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2
 Task 4 Task 5 Task 6:

 54 | P a g e
 Oral: Listening comprehension / Literature: Contextual questions Mid-year examinations:
Formal prepared speaking / Comprehension, language,
Prepared Reading aloud literature and writing

 55 | P a g e
 GRADE 8 TERM 3
 Skills Listening & Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking 1 hour 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour (integrated
 and explicit)
 Listening for Intensive reading of Longer Transactional: Infinitive
 appreciation: text for Punctuation
 comprehension on Discuss features of a Expressing likes and
 Listen to new words paragraph level dialogue. dislikes.
 and sounds related to Spelling
 a new theme e.g. E.g. Read text on Learners write a dialogue Commonly confused
 food. specific theme and using new vocabulary and words
 answer grammar.
 Informal speaking comprehension
1 and 2

 in groups: questions. Focus on process writing:
  Planning Vocabulary in context
 Practice new words (could assess)  Drafting
 and use simple  Proofreading
 sentences to describe Use bilingual  Editing and rewriting
 pictures related to dictionary.  Presenting
 new theme. Focus on
 pronunciation and (could assess)
 tone.
 Update personal
 dictionary.
 Listening for Intensive reading Short transactional text: Remedial grammar
 appreciation: for comprehension from learners’ writing
 at sentence and Introduce and discuss the of dialogue.
 E.g. Listen to paragraph level: features of writing a short
 dialogues being read transactional text for Premièrement,
 by peers Reading of specific specific purposes. deuxièmement,
 instructions related to finalement, après
 Formal speaking new theme e.g. How Write instructions e.g. For cela, ensuite, etc.
 and presenting: to make a particular making your own favourite Imperative
3 and 4

 dish or drink. dish or drink. Sequential commands
 E.g. Learners read Infinitive
 dialogues aloud. Focus on process writing: Punctuation
 Spelling
 (this activity could be  Planning Commonly confused
 assessed)  Drafting words
  Proofreading Correct use of
  Editing and rewriting concord.
  Presenting
 Vocabulary in context
 (could assess)

 56 | P a g e
 Listening for Intensive reading of Short transactional text: Remedial grammar
 appreciation: Visual Texts: from learners’ writing
 Label picture of e.g. a for specific purposes.
 Learners listen to View audio visual cooking scene.
 peer presentations. text based on current premièrement,
 E.g. How to make theme. E.g. Cooking Write a shopping list for deuxièmement,
 favourite meal. programme on TV. ingredients. finalement, après
 cela, ensuite, etc.
5 and 6

 Formal speaking Answer questions Focus on process writing: Imperative
 and presenting: after viewing.  Planning Sequential commands
  Drafting Infinitive
 Learner presents  Proofreading Punctuation
 prepared speech. E.g.  Editing and Spelling
 giving instructions to rewriting Commonly confused
 complete a specific  Presenting words
 task. Correct use of
 Update personal concord.
 (can be assessed) dictionaries.
 Vocabulary in context
 Listening for Reading for Transactional: Forms of address
 information / comprehension on Polite requests
 appreciation: paragraph level Fill in information based Prepositions
 on listening to dialogue. Question words like
 Listen to dialogue. E.g. Read descriptive E.g. Items bought by Où…, Avez-vous…,
 E.g. Customer and paragraph on current customer and prices. Combien de …, C’est
 combien…etc.
7 and 8

 shopkeeper. theme and answer
 questions. Write sentences / captions New verbs and nouns
 Informal speaking for a picture based on Numbers
 and group work. (could assess theme and language Modals
 comprehension) covered. Abbreviations
 Respond to questions Spelling
 related to listening. Plurals

 Vocabulary in context
 Listening for Literary text Creative: Remedial grammar
 appreciation from learners’
 E.g. Read story / E.g. Write captions for a writing.
 E.g. Listening to part poems / songs / short picture story based on
 of / complete story / drama / short novel theme and language Reinforcing all
 poems / songs / short and answer covered to reinforce grammar done this
 drama / short novel comprehension grammar learned term.
 questions. throughout the term.
 Informal speaking Vocabulary in
 and group work (could assess) (could assess) context.
9 and 0

 E.g. Respond orally /
 make predictions
 about title / pictures.

 Formal speaking
 and presenting:

 Prepared reading
 aloud. E.g. Story /
 poem / song etc.

 57 | P a g e
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3
 Task 7 Task 8 Task 9

Oral: Prepared reading aloud / Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 2: Comprehension and
listening comprehension / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / language OR
prepared speaking Transactional (Shorter or longer) text Literature: Contextual questions

 58 | P a g e
 GRADE 8 TERM 4
 Skills Listening & Reading & Writing & Presenting Language
 Speaking Viewing 1 hour structures and
 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated
 and explicit)
 Listening for Intensive reading Short Transactional: Forms of address
 comprehension: of Texts at word Polite requests
 level: Practise writing new words Imperatives
 Introduce new into personal dictionaries / do Question words
 vocabulary on View and read new a crossword / label pictures / Conjunctives
 theme through words on theme. write captions for pictures. Quantity
 acoustic impulses. Spelling
 E.g. Sounds of And Plurals
 different modes of Abbreviations
 transport. Intensive reading Adjectives and
 of Texts at adverbs
 Informal sentence and Present tense
1 and 2

 Speaking paragraph level: Future tense
 Times and days of
 Respond to Read dialogue on the week.
 questions after the selected theme Modals
 listening to e.g. someone
 acoustic impulses wanting to get from Vocabulary in
 eg. Modes of A to B using a context
 transport. particular mode of
 transport.

 Answer
 comprehension
 questions on the
 dialogue.
 Listening for Reading for Creative Text: Punctuation
 appreciation: comprehension: Spelling
 Learners write a creative text Prepositions
 Listening to poem / Literary text based on visual stimulus eg. Present and future
 song / story based Town scene. tense
 on theme. Learners can read Positive and
 additional poems / Focus on process writing: negative
 Informal speaking text on selected  Planning Location phrases
  Drafting
3 and 4

 and group work: theme. Adjectives and
  Proofreading adverbs
 Learners learn and Answer  Editing and rewriting
 sing song or comprehension  Presenting Vocabulary in
 perform poem. questions on text. context

 Focus on Look up new
 pronunciation, vocabulary in
 rhythm, body bilingual dictionary.
 language and
 gestures.

 59 | P a g e
 Listening for Intensive reading Creative text: Remedial grammar
 appreciation: of Visual Texts: from learners’
 Learners write captions for a creative writing.
 Learners listen to Learners can view picture story.
 creative pieces visual texts and Do exercise on
 read by peers. match sentences to Focus on process writing: aspects of grammar
 these visual texts.  Planning covered.
 Formal speaking  Drafting Interrogatives
 and presenting:  Proofreading Adjectives
5 and 6

  Editing and rewriting Colours
 Learner read  Presenting Polite requests
 prepared creative Spelling
 texts or a poem. Plurals
 Present Tense
 Negatives
 Demonstratives
 Possessives

 Vocabulary in
 context
 Listening for Reading for Creative and transactional Revision of
 information / comprehension texts: language structures
 interaction: and conventions as
 Selected text for Revise and reinforce the well as vocabulary.
 Revision through revision of process of writing different
 discussion of comprehension text types such as dialogues, Remedial grammar
7 and 8

 topics covered in techniques. descriptive / narrative from learners’
 the year. paragraphs and short writing. Captions
 Revision of literary transactional texts. for picture story.
 Informal speaking texts.

 Learners respond
 to questions based
 on work covered.
9 and 10

 End of year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 4
 Task 10

End of year examinations:
Paper 1: *Orals
Paper 2: Language in Context, Literature and Writing

*Orals: Oral year mark from cumulative speaking, listening and reading. Final mark should include at least one
prepared speaking task, one listening task and one prepared reading aloud task.

 60 | P a g e
 3.5.1.3 Grade 9

 GRADE 9 TERM 1
 Skills Listening & Reading & Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking Viewing 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and
 explicit)
 Listening for Reading for Creative text / Longer Sentence structure
 interaction and comprehension: transactional text: (Subject – verb -
 dialogue: Information Paragraph / dialogue object),

 Pair and whole e.g. a description e.g. Write a descriptive Use of the simple
 class: about someone / a paragraph / dialogue present tense
 Introduce a class- picture of someone
 mate using the Giving information in a Vocabulary from texts
 information logical order dealt with
1 and 2

 provided: e.g.
 Nationality Process writing stages:
 Name
 Age  Planning
 Grade  Drafting
 Origin  Proofreading
  Editing and
 Formal speaking rewriting
 and presenting:  Presenting
 Prepared reading
 aloud
 Listen for Literary text : Creative text:
 appreciation
 E.g. Read rhyme(s) Write a narrative Introduce new verbs
 Informal Speaking / poem(s) / song(s) paragraph se coucher. s’habiller
 and group work: for comprehension
 and appreciation Remedial grammar
3 and 4

 E.g. Memorise Introduce process writing from learners’ writing
 rhyme / song and Discuss text stages:
 present it in groups  Planning Vocabulary in context
  Drafting
  Proofreading
  Editing and
 rewriting
  Presenting

 61 | P a g e
 Listening for Reading for Short transactional /
 information and comprehension at Creative text: Nouns
 comprehension: a word and Verbs
 sentence level: E.g. Fill in a form
 Informal Speaking according to listening Vocabulary in context
 and group work: E.g. Start a new exercise e.g. Je dors dans la
 theme: chambre./La pièce est
 Teach features of E.g. Write a narrative vide./Le salon est petit.
 listening for Read a text on “My paragraph of learners’
5 and 6

 information home” own home

 E.g. information to Process writing stages:
 be filled in on a
 form:  Planning
 Number of  Drafting
 bedrooms  Proofreading
 Garden  Editing and
 Kitchen rewriting
 Bathroom  Presenting

 Listening for Intensive reading Short transactional:
 interaction of Visual Texts:
 and information E.g. Teach features of a Punctuation
 Introduce features dialogue / prepared Prepositions
 Speaking for of visual text speech Interrogatives
 specific purposes / Direct speech
 Informal speaking E.g. Picture of a Write a dialogue /
 home with text prepared speech Remedial grammar
7 and 8

 E.g. Picture of a from learners’ writing
 home as used in Process writing stages:
 reading: Vocabulary in context
  Planning e.g. Je regarde la
 Asking questions  Drafting télévision dans le
 about picture and  Proofreading salon./Je mange à la
 responding to the  Editing and cuisine.
 questions rewriting
  Presenting
 Listening for Reading for Creative / Verbs, adjectives and
 appreciation / comprehension: Transactional: nouns - revision
 specific integrated with reading
 information: E.g. Read a E.g. Sentence writing / and writing
 paragraph Label pictures
 E.g. Listening Translation of
 comprehension View and discuss sentences to assess
 various visual texts grammar taught
 Prepared Speaking e.g. a picture,
9 and 10

 and presenting: photograph Explain meaning of
 verbs, adjectives and
 E.g. Dialogue or nouns in use
 Prepared speech
 Reinforcement of
 grammar covered in
 first term.

 Remedial grammar
 from learners’ writing

 Vocabulary: in context

 62 | P a g e
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1
 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Oral: Listening Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 1: Comprehension and
comprehension / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / language
Prepared Speaking / Transactional (Shorter or longer) text
Prepared Reading aloud

 63 | P a g e
 GRADE 9 TERM 2
 Skills Listening & Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking 1 hour 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour (integrated
 and explicit)
 Listening for Reading for Shorter Transactional:
 specific information comprehension on Punctuation
 sentence level: Process writing stages: Imperative
 E.g. Listen to  Planning Basic Conjunctions
 instructions / Read examples of  Drafting Logical connectors
 directions given instructions or  Proofreading that signal cause
 directions  Editing and (parce que, alors,
 Speaking for rewriting donc) and time (puis,
 specific purposes /  Presenting ensuite, après)
 Formal speaking Prepositions (revision)
 and presenting E.g. Write directions or Negatives
1 and 2

 (Prepared Reading instructions
 aloud)
 Vocabulary in context
 E.g. Give instructions e.g. Pour aller à la
 or directions (how to poste s’il vous plaît?
 get from A to B) in Allez tout droit. Puis,
 groups / individual tournez à gauche.
 Continuez tout droit.
 or Ensuite traversez le
 pont. C’est sur la
 Prepared Reading gauche.
 aloud - examples of
 instructions or
 directions
 Listening for Reading for Short Transactional:
 specific comprehension on Remedial grammar
 information: word and sentence E.g. Writing for a specific from learners’ writing
 level: purpose
 E.g. Listening to Punctuation
 directions/ Read to identify and Process of writing a Imperative
 instructions for discuss the use of e.g. prepared speech. Basic Conjunctions
 listening imperative, Logical connectors
 comprehension / to prepositions Process writing stages: that signal cause
 the prepared introduced  Planning (parce que, alors,
3 and 4

 speeches  Drafting donc) and time (alors,
  Proofreading ensuite, après)
 Formal speaking  Editing and Prepositions (revision)
 and presenting: rewriting Negatives
  Presenting
 Discuss the features Vocabulary in context
 of prepared speech Prepared speech (for
 enrichment)
 Prepared speech
 E.g. giving directions
 / making something
 (instructions)

 64 | P a g e
 listening for Reading for Transactional: Phrase and sentence
 specific comprehension on structures and
 information: sentence and E.g. label a weather report conventions
 Listening paragraph level: / weather symbols /
 Comprehension pictures Present / future tense
 Read and interpret
 Informal speaking the features of e.g. New verbs
 cartoons, weather
 Informal Speaking: map / weather report Idioms
5 and 6

 E.g. weather / poem / song
 Remedial grammar
 from learners’ writing

 Vocabulary in context
 e.g; Il fait chaud.
 Il fait froid.
 Il pleut.
 Il neige.
 Il fait beau.
 Il fait mauvais
 Formal speaking Reading for Transactional: Identify and reinforce
 and presenting: comprehension: the different language
 E.g. Write weather report / structures and
 E.g. Peer reading of dialogue conventions.
 Role play / report on weather reports /
 the weather dialogues Process writing stages: Plurals
7 and 8

  Planning
 Listening for  Drafting Abbreviations
 appreciation:  Proofreading Remedial grammar
  Editing and from learners’ writing
 E.g. listen to the rewriting
 weather report / role  Presenting . Vocabulary in context
 play
9 and 10

 Mid-year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2
 Task 4 Task 5 Task 6

Oral: Listening comprehension / Literature: Contextual questions Mid-year examinations:
Formal prepared speaking / Comprehension, language,
Prepared Reading aloud literature and writing

 65 | P a g e
 GRADE 9 TERM 3
 Skills Listening & Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking 1 hour 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour (integrated
 and explicit)
 Listening for Intensive reading of Longer Transactional: Prepositions.
 appreciation text for
 comprehension on Introduce and discuss the Word order
 E.g. Listen to sounds paragraph level features of writing a
 around a theme e.g. friendly letter / narrative / Possessives
 farm E.g. Read text on descriptive paragraph
 specific theme and Adjectives and
 Formal speaking answer Write a friendly letter / adverbs
 and presenting comprehension narrative / descriptive
 questions paragraph on e.g. my visit Comparisons
 Prepared Reading to the farm e.g. La vache est plus
 aloud with focus on grande que le chien.
 fluency, Focus on process writing:
 pronunciation and  Planning Punctuation
  Drafting
1 and 2

 tone
 e.g. text on theme  Proofreading Concord
  Editing and
 rewriting Agreement of verb
  Presenting and subject /
 adjective

 Present / past future /
 tense

 Salutation for friendly
 letter

 Vocabulary in context
 la ferme, les
 animaux;, la poule;,
 le cheval, les chevaux

 66 | P a g e
 Listening for Reading for Longer Transactional: Prepositions.
 interaction: comprehension: (continue)
 Word order
 E.g. Listen to Reading of literary Introduce and discuss the
 questions related to text for information features of writing a Possessives
 visual stimulus and comprehension friendly letter / narrative /
 (picture of farm) descriptive paragraph Adjectives and
 Or adverbs
 Informal Speaking Write a friendly letter /
 and group work: Example of a friendly narrative / descriptive Comparisons
3 and 4

 letter or paragraph paragraph on e.g. my visit
 E.g. Responding to to the farm Punctuation
 oral questions related
 to visual stimulus Focus on process writing: Concord
  Planning
  Drafting Agreement of verb
  Proofreading and subject /
  Editing and adjective
 rewriting
  Presenting Present / past future /
 tense

 Vocabulary in context
 Listening for Intensive reading of Creative:
 comprehension Visual Texts: Remedial grammar
 Label picture of e.g. the from learners’ writing
 E.g. listen to acoustic View picture on garage
 impulses chosen theme – e.g. Polite requests
 the garage Or
 And Revision of
 Transactional: imperative
 Listen to a dialogue
 on a new theme e.g. Filling in missing Interrogatives
 garage or shop information based on
 listening dialogue New verbs and nouns
 Informal Speaking
5 and 6

 and group work: And Modals

 E.g. Use vocabulary Write a descriptive Spelling
 of new theme, speak paragraph on e.g. a picture
 about the acoustic based on theme Vocabulary in
 impulses and practise context:
 saying sentences e.g. La voiture est
 Focus on process writing: dans le garage. / La
  Planning tondeuse est en
  Drafting panne.
  Proofreading
  Editing and
 rewriting
  Presenting

 67 | P a g e
 Listening for Reading for Creative: Remedial grammar
 appreciation comprehension on from learners’ writing
 paragraph level Write sentences / captions Polite requests
 Listen to role play of for a picture based on Revision of
 learners E.g. Peer reading of theme and language imperative
 descriptive covered. Interrogatives
 Formal Speaking paragraphs written in New verbs and nouns
 and presenting previous cycle (for Numbers
 enjoyment) Modals
7 and 8

 role play on theme Abbreviations
 e.g. the garage or Spelling
 Plurals
 Literary text
 Vocabulary in context
 E.g. Reading for
 enjoyment e.g. poem
 / short story / short
 drama / short novel

 Listening for Literary text Creative: Reinforcing all
 appreciation grammar done this
 E.g. Read story / E.g. Write captions for a term
 E.g. Listening to part poems / songs / short picture story based on
 of / complete story / drama / short novel theme and language Vocabulary in context
 poems / songs / short and respond to covered to reinforce
 drama / short novel comprehension grammar learned
 questions throughout the term.
 Informal speaking
9 and 10

 and group work
 E.g. Respond orally /
 make predictions to
 title / pictures

 And

 Reading aloud

 Work on e.g.
 pronunciation and
 fluency
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3
 Task 7 Task 8 Task 9

Oral: Prepared reading aloud / Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 2: Comprehension and
listening comprehension / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / language OR
prepared speaking Transactional (Shorter or longer) text Literature: Contextual questions

 68 | P a g e
 GRADE 9 TERM 4
 Skills Listening & Reading & Writing & Presenting Language
 Speaking Viewing 1 hour structures and
 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated
 and explicit)
 Listening for Intensive reading Creative:
 comprehension of Visual Texts: Negative
 Practise question and answer Interrogatives
 Listen to a View and read sentences on the selected Polite requests
 dialogue e.g. on a pictures / a menu on theme. Likes and dislikes
 new theme – the theme e.g. Conjunctions
 someone orders different food types Label pictures used. Forms of address
 food in a restaurant
 And Transactional: Bonsoir/Bonjour
 Informal Write a dialogue on e.g. a monsieur/madame
 Speaking Read dialogue(s) on restaurant scene Articles
 the selected theme Modals
 Respond to e.g. a restaurant Focus on process writing: Vouloir
 questions after scene or buying  Planning commander
 viewing and food.  Drafting
 reading Visual  Proofreading Expressions of
 Text Answer  Editing and rewriting Quantity
 comprehension  Presenting Adjectives and
 questions on the adverbs
 dialogue. Possessives
 Demonstratives
 Spelling
1 and 2

 Plurals
 Abbreviations

 Vocabulary in
 context
 Commander
 e.g. Pour
 commencer je vais
 prendre…/Je
 voudrais un café/ un
 thé/ une
 omelette./Comme
 plat
 principal…/Comme
 dessert je
 voudrais…/Un
 hamburger, s’il
 vous plaît.
 monsieur./Deux
 glaces au chocolat
 s’il vous plaît
 madame./L’addition
 s’il vous plaît

 69 | P a g e
 Listening for Reading for Transactional: Remedial grammar
 specific comprehension from learners’
 information Write e.g. dialogue for three writing
 E.g. Reading of in a restaurant – waiter and Negative
 E.g. Listening learners’ written two customers Interrogatives
 comprehension on dialogues e.g. Quel est le plat
 theme selected in du jour ?
 previous cycle. Or Polite requests
 e.g. Je voudrais …
 Formal Speaking E.g. A selected text s’il vous plaît.
 and presenting: on the theme Likes and dislikes
 Conjunctions
 E.g. Dialogues / Forms of address
 role play as written Articles
 in this and Modals
 previous cycle. Expressions of
3 and 4

 Quantity
 Adjectives and
 adverbs
 Possessives
 Demonstratives
 Spelling
 Plurals
 Abbreviations

 Vocabulary in
 context
 e.g. Voici le
 menu/Je commande
 à la carte./Je vais
 prendre une salade
 mixte et une
 omelette.

 Listening for Intensive reading Creative: Interrogatives
 specific of Visual Texts: Adjectives
 information E.g. Label pictures; Colours
 Learners view and Practise writing descriptive Polite requests
 E.g. Learners listen read text e.g. a sentences. Spelling
 for new picture of different Plurals
 vocabulary by people wearing Practise writing questions and Present Tense
 using a visual text different types of answers e.g. Qu’est-ce qu’elle Negatives
 - Introduce new clothing. They can porte? C’est combien, cette Demonstratives
 theme e.g. clothes e.g. match text to robe? Possessives
 the pictures.
5 and 6

 Informal And Vocabulary in
 Speaking context
 E.g. Write a descriptive
 Practise saying paragraph to describe what
 questions and someone is wearing or buying
 answers e.g.
 Qu’est-ce qu’elle
 porte? C’est Focus on process writing:
 combien, cette  Planning
 robe?  Drafting
  Proofreading
  Editing and rewriting
  Presenting

 70 | P a g e
 Listening for Reading for Examination preparation. Revise sentence
 appreciation comprehension constructions and
 Reinforce the process of language
 E.g. Listen to a E.g. Text selected writing different text types conventions learnt
 song / poem / on theme with such as dialogues, descriptive
 descriptive comprehension / narrative paragraphs Remedial grammar
 paragraphs written questions to be from learners’
7 and 8

 by learners in answered writing
 previous cycle
 Vocabulary in
 Informal context
 speaking

 E.g. Reinforcement
 of the questions
 and sentences done
 orally this term
9 and 10

 End of year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 4
 Task 10

End of year examinations:
Paper 1: *Orals
Paper 2: Language in Context, Literature and Writing

*Orals: Oral year mark from cumulative speaking, listening and reading. Final mark should include at least one
prepared speaking task, one listening task and one prepared reading aloud.

 71 | P a g e
 SECTION 4: Assessment in Second Additional Language

4.1 INTRODUCTION

 Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information
 about the performance of learners, using various forms of assessment. It involves four steps: generating
 and collecting evidence of achievement; evaluating this evidence; recording the findings and using this
 information to understand and thereby assist the learner’s development in order to improve the process
 of learning and teaching.

 Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning).
 In both cases regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance the learning experience.

 The assessment of language skills should be integrated. The assessment of a comprehension passage
 should be linked with language use. The assessment of writing should incorporate topics about things
 that happen in real life situations.

4.2 INFORMAL OR DAILY ASSESSMENT

 Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on a learner’s
 achievement that can be used to improve their learning.

 Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations,
 discussions, practical demonstrations, learner-teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, etc.
 Informal assessment may be as simple as stopping during the lesson to observe learners or to discuss
 with learners how learning is progressing. Informal assessment should be used to provide feedback to
 the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but need not be recorded. It should not be seen as
 separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom. Learners or teachers can mark these
 assessment tasks.

 Self assessment and peer assessment actively involves learners in assessment. This is important as it
 allows learners to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily
 assessment tasks are not formally recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. The results of daily
 assessment tasks are not taken into account for promotion and certification purposes.

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as
 Formal Assessment. Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for
 progression and certification purposes. All Formal Assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the
 purpose of quality assurance and to ensure that appropriate standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a
grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, writing tasks, oral
presentations, demonstrations, performances, etc. While preparations for formal assessment tasks could be done
outside the classroom, the final version should be done under controlled conditions, in the classroom.

Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject.

The following tables provide the formal assessment requirements for Second Additional Languages:

Table 1: Grades 7 - 9
 72 | P a g e
 Formal Assessment
 During the Year End-of-Year Examination

 40% 60%
 School Based
 End-of-Year Exam Papers
 Assessment (SBA) –
 40% 35% 25%

 Oral Assessment
 Tasks:
 2 tests Listening
 6 tasks Written examinations Prepared speaking
 Language in context, writing and literature Prepared reading aloud
 1 examination (mid-
 (1½ hours) The oral tasks
 year)
 undertaken during the
 course of the year
 constitute the end-of-
 year internal assessment.

The forms of assessment used should be age and developmental level appropriate. The design of these tasks
should cover the content of the subject and include a variety of tasks designed to achieve the objectives of the
subject.

Formal assessments must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners as shown below:

Table 2
 Cognitive Levels Activity Percentage of
 Task
Literal Questions that deal with information explicitly stated in the text.
(Level 1) • Name the things/people/places/
 • Identify the persons
 • List the facts/names
 • Describe the place/person/
  Who was the person ……? Levels 1 and 2:
  What did the person …..? 80%
  Why did the person ……?
Reorganisation  When did it happen …..?
  Where did it happen ……?
(Level 2)
 Questions that require organization of information explicitly stated
 in the text.
 • List two main points/ideas
  Identify the person/persons ……
  Explain what happened …….
  Describe the situation/environment/people …..
Evaluation These questions deal with judgements concerning value and worth. Level 3: 20%
(Level 3) These include judgements regarding reality, credibility, facts and
 opinions, validity, logic and reasoning, and issues such as the
 desirability and acceptability of decisions and actions in terms of
 moral values.
 • Do you agree with the character’s behavior/statement?
  Is the character’s attitude/behaviour/action acceptable to you?

 73 | P a g e
 Give a reason for your answer.
  Criticise the character’s behaviour.
  Select words that describe the person’s character the best …

4.4 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT

The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
throughout a term

4.4.1 Overview of requirements

The following tables provide an overview of the Programme of Assessment requirements for each term for
Second Additional Languages:

Table 4.1: Grades 7 - 9
 Programme of Assessment
Grades End of the year
 SBA per Term
 exams
 Term 1: Term 2: Term 3: Term 4:

 7-9 1 Written Test 2 Tasks 1 Written Test 1 Internal end-of-
 + + + year examination
 2 Tasks 1 Mid-year examination 2 Tasks

Grades The structure of Examination papers
 7-9 Paper 1 1 Internal end-of-
 year examination
 Paper 2: Language in context - comprising
 comprehension, language, 2 Papers:
 literature and writing
 Paper 1: Orals

 Paper 2: Language in
 context -
 comprehension,
 language, literature
 and writing

Grades 7-9
Term Mark (Terms 1 – 3):
  Each term, add raw marks and totals and convert to % for term mark.
Promotion Mark:
  Add raw marks and totals for SBA tasks from term 1 to term 3 and convert to 40%,
  Convert Oral mark (Paper 1) to 25%
  Convert Paper 2 to 35%

Table 4.2: Grades 7-9
 Programme of Assessment
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1

 74 | P a g e
 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Oral: Listening Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 1: Comprehension and
comprehension / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / language
Prepared Speaking / Transactional (Shorter or
Prepared Reading longer) text
aloud
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2

 Task 4 Task 5 Task 6

Oral: Listening Literature: Contextual Mid-year examinations:
comprehension / questions
Prepared Speaking / Language in context – comprehension,
Prepared Reading language, literature and writing
aloud

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3
 Task 7 Task 8 Task 9:

Oral: Listening Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 2: Comprehension and language OR
comprehension / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Literature: Contextual questions
Prepared Speaking / Transactional (Shorter or
Prepared Reading longer) text
aloud
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 4
 Task 10
End of year examinations:
Paper 1: *Orals
Paper 2: Language in context - comprehension, language, literature and writing

*Orals: Learners should do one prepared speaking task, one listening task, and one prepared reading aloud task
during the year.

Note:
A test in the Programme of Assessment should not be made up of several smaller tests. Each test should cover a
substantial amount of content and should be set for 30 – 60 minutes each and reflect the different cognitive
levels as set out for the examination paper.

 75 | P a g e
 4.4.2 Examinations: Grades 7 – 9

Format of Examination Paper 1

 PAPER SECTION TIME
 A: Comprehension Grades 7 - 9
 1½ hours
 1Language in context, literature and

 (A range of texts can be used including visual and or graphic texts)
 B: Language
  Language structures and conventions (words and sentences) should be
 assessed in context using a variety of texts. .
 writing.

 C. Literature
 Any one of the following:
 Poetry / short stories / short novel / short drama (Contextual questions)

 D Writing
 Creative (Narrative / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Transactional (Shorter or
 longer) text

Content to be covered
Assessment addresses the content as set out in this document. Due to the conceptual progression of the content
across the grades, content and skills from Grades 7 –9 will be assessed in the papers at the end of each year.

Oral Assessment Task: Paper 2

The oral assessment tasks undertaken during the course of the year constitute the end-of-year internal
assessment. The details for the oral tasks, which are administered during the year, are as follows:

 Paper 2 DETAILS
 *Orals will be internally set, internally assessed and internally moderated.
  Reading
 Prepared reading aloud
 Assess: Understanding of text, conveying meaning, use of voice, correct pronunciation
  Speaking:
 Orals

 Prepared speaking
 Assess: Planning and organisation of content, tone, speaking, and presentation skills,
 audio-visual aids, correct language
  Listening
 Listening Comprehension
 Assess: Listen for comprehension and information
*Orals: Oral year mark from cumulative speaking, listening and reading. Final mark should include at least one
prepared speaking task, one listening task and one prepared reading aloud task.

The tasks that are used for formal assessment are recorded and are used to determine whether a learner should
progress or be promoted to the next grade.

 76 | P a g e
 The teacher must plan and submit the annual formal Programme of Assessment to the School Management
Team (SMT) before the start of the school year. This will be used to draw up a school assessment plan in each
grade. The school assessment plan should be provided to learners and parents in the first week of the first term.

4.5 RECORDING AND REPORTING

Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific
assessment task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in the
Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the
learner’s conceptual progression within a grade and her / his readiness to progress or being promoted to the next
grade. Records of learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners
in the teaching and learning process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other
stakeholders. Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’
meetings, school visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters, etc.
Teachers in all grades report in percentages against the subject. The various achievement levels and their
corresponding percentage bands are as shown in the Table below.

 CODES AND PERCENTAGES FOR RECORDING AND REPORTING

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE
 7 Outstanding achievement 80 – 100
 6 Meritorious achievement 70 – 79
 5 Substantial achievement 60 – 69
 4 Adequate achievement 50 – 59
 3 Moderate achievement 40 – 49
 2 Elementary achievement 30 – 39
 1 Not achieved 0 - 29

 Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages
 against the subject on the learners’ report cards.

4.6 MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT

Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation
should be implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate
moderation practices must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

4.6.1 Formal Assessment

  Grades 7 and 8 tests and examination are internally moderated. The subject advisor/appointed
 provincial/district official must moderate a sample of these tasks during his / her school visits to verify
 the standard of tasks and the internal moderation.
  Grade 9 tests and examinations must be moderated at district and provincial level. This process will be
 managed by the provincial education department.
  Subject advisor/appointed provincial/district official must moderate samples of tests and examination
 papers before they are written by learners to verify standards and guide teachers on the setting of these
 tasks.

4.6.2 Oral Assessment Tasks
  Grade 7 - 9: Each oral task which is to be used as part of the Programme of Assessment should be
 submitted to the head of department or subject head for moderation before learners attempt the task.
 Teachers should then assess the oral assessment tasks.

 77 | P a g e
 The subject advisor or an assigned provincial moderator must moderate a sample of oral assessment
 tasks during his / her school visits to verify the standard of tasks and the internal moderation.

 A moderator delegated by the department of basic education must moderate a sample of oral
 assessment tasks for grade 9.

4.7 GENERAL
 This document should be read in conjunction with:

 4.7.1 The National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements

 of the National Curriculum Statement, Grades R – 12; and

 4.7.2 The National Protocol for Assessment Grades R – 12.

 78 | P a g e
 GLOSSARY
Active listening – when a person tries to put themselves in the place of the speaker and listens seriously to what
he or she has to say.

acronym -a pronounceable word formed from the first letter or letters in phrase or name, e.g. ANA (Annual
National Assessment), SONA (State of the Nation Address), SASA (South Africa’s Schools Act) e.g. ONU :
Organisation des Nations Unies

additional language - ( also see home language)- a language learned in addition to one’s home language

additive multilingualism - when a person learns a language (or languages) in addition to his or her home
language. This language does not replace the home language but is learned alongside it. In an additive
multilingual programme, the home language is strengthened and affirmed while any further language learned is
seen as adding value (e.g. all Additional Languages, including the Language of Learning and Teaching are
taught alongside the home language but do not replace it)

aesthetic - 1. sensitive to the beauty of language and thus sensitive to and appreciative of the lasting value of
 texts
 2. an aesthete is a person sensitive to artistic beauty. “Aesthetic” refers to the beauty to be
 found in a work of art. One can discuss the aesthetics of a work, or make aesthetic judgements

alliteration -a pattern of sound that includes the repetition of consonant sounds. The repetition can be located at
 the beginning of successive words or inside the words.
e.g. Pour qui sont ces serpents qui sifflent sur vos têtes ?" Jean Racine, Andromaque

ambiguity - double meaning created by the way in which words are used; when used unintentionally, ambiguity
 obscures the meaning (e.g. ‘General flies back to front’ or ‘Short children’s stories are in demand’)
e.g. J'ai perdu mes fils may mean I lost my sons or I lost my reel of threads.

analogy - 1.finding similarities in things that are usually seen as different.
 2. finding similarities in things that are usually seen as different, a way of explaining or illustrating
something, but not a proof. One must be alert to false analogy. There should be accurate correspondence
between the thing that is explained and the details of the analogy
e.g. «Un serpent de fumée noire », Maupassant

anecdotes - narratives of small incidents or events told for the purpose of information, entertainment, humour,
malice, or to reveal character

animation – the technique of using a series of still pictures to create an illusion of movement or life

anticlimax – when an expectation of some high point of importance or excitement is not fulfilled or the
seriousness of a literary plot is suddenly lost as a result of a comical, digressive or meaningless event

antithesis – the expression of two opposed or different ideas in balanced contrast (e.g. ‘more haste, less speed’)
e.g. "Pauvres enfants en vacances"

antonym – a word that is opposite in meaning to another word in the same language (e.g. ‘happy’ and ‘sad’)
e.g. grand vs petit

Aphesis – In this case, you have dropped the unstressed vowel at the beginning of the word. These are often
unintentional and casually spoken versions of the words. Perhaps the best example is ’cause instead of because.

appropriateness – if language is appropriate it is suitable in terms of the context in which it is used (e.g. the
greeting ‘Good morning, Mr Jones’ would be appropriate in a formal work situation whereas ‘Hi, Jo’ would be
appropriate between friends)

assessment – a continuous structured process of gathering information on learner competence in many different
ways

 79 | P a g e
 assonance – 1. repetition (mostly) of vowel sounds in two or more words e.g. “ It is June and the world is all in
tune”

e.g. « Tout m'afflige et me nuit et conspire à me nuire » Jean Racine, Phèdre

 2. Add. The vowel sounds do not have to be precisely the same: assonance could consist of a series
 of vowel sounds that create a certain effect

audience – 1. the intended reader(s), listener(s) or viewers of a particular text; in planning a piece of writing
speakers/writers must take into the consideration the purpose and audience when choosing an appropriate form
of writing
 2. Add. In particular, an audience is those attending a live performance of music or drama.

authentic texts – texts which have a practical function and are not literary (e.g. magazine and newspaper
articles, recordings from radio and television, advertisements, product labels, travel brochures, government
forms, examples of real letters)

bias – 1. a tendency to favour one thing, idea, attitude or person over another which makes it difficult to make a
 fair assessment
 2. Add. In the game of bowls, the “wood” or bowl has a weight on one side which makes it turn towards
 that side

caption – a title or comment attached above or below an article, a picture, a photo and so on

caricature – 1.an exaggerated portrayal (written or visual) of a character which is achieved by mocking
 personality traits or appearance
 2. Add. The drawings of cartoonists in newspapers are usually intended to be caricatures and work
 by exaggerating or distorting features of appearance with a view to being comic or satirical

cause (see also effect)- that which gives rise to an action or condition

cinematographic techniques – devices used in the construction of a film (e.g. composition, lighting, type of
 shot)

clarify- making the meaning of the text clear to the reader

clause – Put in the right place. “The man who was wearing a red shirt ran away.” The main sentence is “The
man ran away.” The words “who was wearing a red shirt” is a subordinate clause. It cannot stand by itself,
although the verb is complete (finite). Subordinate clauses start with a conjunction (when, because) or a relative
pronoun (who, which). The conjunction links the clause to some part of the main sentence. “The man wearing a
red shirt ran away.” In this sentence “wearing a red shirt” is not a clause but a phrase. The verb is not complete
(it is participle).

climax – the most exciting, effective or important part of the story; this important part is not necessarily at the
end

clipped – Similar to truncation in that you are using a part of the word to form the abbreviation, but in this case
you’re using either the middle or end. Common clipped abbreviations include phone (telephone), cell (cellular
phone) and fridge (refrigerator).

coherence – 1. the underlying logical relationship which links ideas together and gives a passage or paragraph
 unity
 2. Add. It may also imply adequate grammar to convey the meaning, or orderly sentence structure.
 Chaotic grammar may make a statement incoherent.

cohesion – the linking if sentences or paragraphs by means of logical connectors such as conjunctions, pronouns
or repetition

 80 | P a g e
 e.g. connecteurs logiques: . car / pour/ en effet / en conclusion

colloquialism (see also slang) – language belonging to ordinary or familiar conversation but not used in formal
language
e.g. bouffer (to eat colloquial) instead of manger (formal)
Ça vaut le coup (It's worth it - colloquial) instead of Cela vaut la peine (formal)

comparative (see also superlative) – degrees of comparison as found in adjectives and adverbs are positive,
comparative or superlative (e.g. ‘long’ (positive), ‘longer’ (comparative), ‘longest’ (superlative)
e.g. long, plus long, le plus long

compare (see also contrast) – to assess the way in which things are similar

conflict – the struggle that arises between characters or between individuals and their fate or circumstances;
conflict in literature can also arise from opposing desires or values in a character’s own mind

conjunction – a word used to join two clauses, words, phrases or sentences

connotative meaning(see also denotative) – both the positive and negative associations that a word collects
through usage that go beyond the literal (primary) meaning

e.g. enrobée (plump) has a positive connotation whereas gras (fat) has more negative connotations

context – a text is always used and produced in a context; the context includes the broad and immediate
situation including aspects such as social, cultural and political background; the term can also refer to that which
precedes or follows a word or text and is essential to its meaning

context clues Context clues is using words surrounding an unknown word to determine its meaning. This
reading strategy can be taught in conjunction with vocabulary.

contrast (see also compare) – to consider the way in which things differ

conventions – accepted practices or rules in the use of language. Some conventions help to convey meaning
(e.g. the rules of grammar, punctuation, typefaces, capital letters); some assist in the presentation of content (e.g.
table of contents, general layout, headings, footnotes, charts, captions, lists, pictures, index); and others reflect a
pattern of language that has become formulaic (e.g. greetings, small talk)

continuous assessment – it involves assessment activities that are undertaken throughout the year

critical language awareness - the analysis of how meaning is constructed with understanding of power
relations in and between languages; it empowers the learner to resist manipulation and to use language
sensitively

debate - in debating, two opposing teams compete with one another. They aim to convince the adjudicator and
the audience that their viewpoint about a given topic is more reasonable and justifiable than that of the opposing
team

denotative meaning (see also connotative meaning) – the literal or primary meaning of a word

derivative – a word derived from another or from a root; usually formed by adding a prefix or suffix e.g.
‘quickly from ‘quick’
e.g. rapide - rapidement

dialect – a form of a language adapted by a particular community; it is significantly different from other forms
of the same language in terms of words, structures and/or pronunciation

dramatic irony – occurs when the audience/reader/viewer knows more about the situation and its implications
than the characters involved; it heightens the tension, enjoyment and audience participation

 81 | P a g e
 dramatic structure – 1. the special literary style in which plays are written
 2. the arrangement of plot, acts, scenes, characters and possibly also features of language in a
 play.

drawing conclusions - using written or visual clues to figure out something that is not directly stated in the
reading.

editing – the process of drafting and redrafting a text, including correcting grammatical usage, punctuation and
spelling errors and checking writing for coherence of ideas and cohesion of structure; in media, editing involves
the construction, selection and lay-out of texts

effect (see also cause) – the result or consequence of an action or condition

emotive language – language which arouses strong feelings

euphemism – a mild or vague expression substituted for a thought or word which is felt to be too harsh or
direct
e.g. Elle nous a quittés. (She passed away) instead of Elle est morte. (She died)

explicit (as opposed to implicit)- meaning which is clearly or directly stated

external assessment – assessment conducted by a body outside the institution, e.g. ANA, NSC, provincial paper

evaluate - form opinions, make judgments and develop ideas from reading

figurative (as opposed to literal) - words or phrases used in ac non-literal way to create a desired effect; literal
texts often make concentrated use of figurative language (e.g. simile, personification, metaphor)

fluency – 1. the word comes from the flow of a river and suggests a coherence and cohesion that gives language
use quality of being natural, easy to use and easy to interpret
 2. Add. And with a fair degree of grammatical control (though perhaps not total grammatical
 accuracy).

font – the type and size of the letters used when writing, typing or printing (e.g. 12pt (size) Times New Roman
(style of lettering)

foregrounding (as opposed to backgrounding) – used literally, it means the positioning of a subject in or near
the front of the frame; used figuratively, it refers to emphasising or focusing on one point of aspect more than
another

forum - team speaking or forum debate may be used against other schools, or in the classroom by dividing
learners into teams of four, each of whom will speak on a different aspect of the same topic. An adjudicator
decides on the winning team

genre – the types or categories into which texts are grouped, e.g. novel, drama, poetry, business letter, personal
letter.

gesture – a movement of the face or body which communicates meaning (e.g. nodding of head to indicate
agreement)

graphics – products of the visual and technical arts (e.g. drawing, designing)

home language (see also additional language) – the language first acquired by children through immersion at
 home; the language in which we think

homonym – a word which has both the same sound and spelling as another but has a different meaning (e.g. the
noun ‘the bear’ and the verb ‘to bear’)
e.g. un avocat (an avocado) and un avocat (a lawyer)

 82 | P a g e
 homophone – a word which sounds the same as another but is spelled differently and has a different meaning
(e.g. ‘one’ and ‘won’)
e.g. vers (toward), vert (green), ver (worm) et verre (glass)

hyperbole – a deliberate exaggeration (e.g. to describe something in such a way that it seems much bigger than
it really is: ‘He gave me a mountainous plate of food.’)
e.g. Je meurs de faim (I'm dying of hunger)

image – a picture or visual representation of something

imagery – words, phrases and sentences which create images in our minds such as similes, metaphors,
personification

implicit (as opposed to explicit ) – something implied or suggested in the text but not expressed directly

implied (as opposed to direct meaning) – meaning suggested by the text but not directly stated
e.g. Il est déjà 10 heures

inclusivity – the principle that education should be accessible to all learners whatever their learning styles,
backgrounds and abilities

infer – to pick up meaning behind what is stated and to deduce all the implications

Initialism – Also called alphabetism, this is a group of letters, each pronounced separately, used as an
abbreviation for a name or expression. Examples include: SA, CD, TV, DBE, UK.

initiate – to start (e.g. to initiate conversation)

innuendo – something unpleasant which is hinted at rather than clearly stated

interview - task of gathering information or a face-to-face discussion between people, directed toward some
specific purpose.

intonation – 1.the pattern of the pitch or the melody of an utterance which marks grammatical structures such as
sentences or clauses
 2. Add. And distinguishes between statements and questions and indicates the speaker’s attitude or
 feelings

irony – a statement or situation that has an underlying meaning different from its literal or surface meaning.
Irony is related to tone.
e.g. « Quelle belle journée ! » when it is raining and grey.

jargon – special terms or expressions used in a trade or profession or by any specific group (e.g. computer users
would refer to a ‘CPU’, ‘RAM’ and so on); when jargon is used to exclude listeners/readers from an interaction
it is potentially hurtful or even harmful

language varieties –.language varieties found when minor adaptations in terms of vocabulary, structure and/or
pronunciation have been made; can vary from one region or country to another

literacies –different kinds of literacy e.g. critical, visual, graphic, computer, media, socio-cultural

literacy (see also literacies ) – the ability to process and use information for a variety of purposes and contexts
and to write for different purposes; the ability to decode texts, allowing one to make sense of one’s world. The
capacity to read and write

literal (as opposed to figurative) – the plainest, most direct meaning that can be attributed to words

 83 | P a g e
 malapropism –the mistaken and muddled use of long words to impress; although these words sound almost
right, they are incorrect enough to bring about humour e.g. conversation and conservation. From a certain Mrs
Malaprop, a comic character in a drama.

manipulative language – language which is aimed at obtaining an unfair advantage or gaining influence over
others e.g. advertisements, sales talk, political speeches

meta-language – the language used to talk about literature and language and grammatical terms; it includes
terminology such as ‘context’, ‘style’, ‘plot’ and ‘dialogue’

metaphor – using one thing to describe another thing which has similar qualities (e.g. ‘Education is the key to
success.’)
e.g. “Je me suis baigné dans le poème de la mer.” (Arthur Rimbaud).

mind map – a representation of a theme or topic in which key words and ideas are organised graphically

mode – a method, a way or manner in which something is presented; a way of communicating (e.g. the written
mode, the spoken or oral mode, the visual mode (which includes graphic forms such as charts)); information can
be changed from one mode to another (e.g. converting a graph into a passage)

mood – atmosphere or emotion in written texts; it shows the feeling or the frame of mind of the characters; also
refers to the atmosphere produced by visual, audio or multi-media texts

multi-media – an integrated range of modes that could include written texts, visual material, sound, video and
so on

narrative – a spoken or written account of connected events in order of occurrence, a story

narrative voice / point of view – . the voice of the person telling the story (e.g. a distinction can be made
between first person narrative –‘I’ – who is often a character in the story, or third person narrative in which the
narrator refers to characters as ‘he’, ‘she’ or ‘they’)

onomatopoeia – the use of words to recreate the sounds they describe
e.g. zzzzz to Indicate someone is sleeping; Vroum to imitate the sound of an engine accelerating.

oxymoron – a combination of words with contradictory meanings, used deliberately for effect; usually formed
by using an adjective to qualify a noun with an opposite meaning (e.g. an open secret)
e.g. « Un silence assourdissant » (Albert Camus, La Chute)

panel discussion - groups are formed to discuss a topic, answer questions and respond to tasks
paradox – an apparently self-contradictory statement or one that seems in conflict with logic; lying behind the
superficial contradiction, there is logic or reason

paraphrase – a restatement of an idea or text in one’s own words

paronym – word formed from a foreign word

personification – attributing human characteristics to non-human things

plot – the interrelatedness of the main events in a text; plot involves more than a simple sequence of events as it
suggests a pattern of relationships between events and a web of causation

point of view – the perspective of a character in relation to issues in a novel or play

e.g. Je respecte votre point de vue mais je ne suis pas certain d’être d'accord avec vous.

Portmanteau – The blending of two or more words will give you a portmanteau. The examples include liger
(lion and tiger), brunch (breakfast and lunch), Gautrain, spork (spoon and fork), skort (shorts and skirt), and
brinner (breakfast and dinner).

 84 | P a g e
 prejudice – intolerance of or a pre-judgement against an individual, a group, an idea or a cause

projection- the placement and delivery of volume, clarity and distinctness of voice for communicating to an
audience

pun – a play on words which are identical or similar in sound in order to create humour (e.g. ‘Seven days
without water makes one week/weak.’)

e.g. De deux choses lune, l’autre c’est le soleil. Jacques Prévert. Le paysage changeur 1945

redundancy – the use of words, phrases and sentences which can be omitted without any loss of meaning

register – the use of different words, style, grammar, pitch and tone for different contexts or situations (e.g.
official documents are written in a formal register and friendly letters are usually written in an informal register)

report - (formal and informal) Giving exact feedback of a situation, e.g. accident

re-reading - Rereading is a reading strategy that gives the reader another chance to make sense out of a
challenging text.

restating - Restating is a reading strategy where the reader will retell, shorten, or summarize the meaning of a
passage or chapter, either orally or in written form.

rhetoric device – device such as pause and repetition, used by a speaker to effectively persuade or convince.
Some devices may be manipulative

rhetorical question – a question asked not to get a reply but for emphasis or dramatic effect (e.g. ‘do you know
how lucky you are?’)
e.g. Tu penses vraiment que je n'y ai pas pensé ? Ne vous avais-je pas averti ?

rhyme – words or lines of poetry that end with the same sound including a vowel

rhythm – a regular and repeated pattern of sounds

sarcasm – an ironic expression or tone of voice which is used in order to be unkind or offensive or to make fun
of someone
e.g. “Allez, continue de parler, tu m’intéresses” (Carry on on talking, you interest me very much.) when we
 mean than a person should stop talking.
 Lire tout: Définition de sarcasme - Concept et Sens http://lesdefinitions.fr/sarcasme#ixzz4NLPydNde

satire – the use of ridicule, sarcasm and irony to comment critically on society or individual or a situation

scan – to run one’s eyes over a text in order to find specific information (e.g. scan a telephone directory for a
name and number)

simile – comparing one thing directly with another, a word such as ‘like’ or ‘as’ is used to draw attention to the
comparison

skim – to read a text very quickly to get an overview (e.g. skim the newspaper headlines for the main news)

slang – informal language often used by a group of people, such as teenagers, who use terms like ‘cool’ and
‘awesome’; the difference between colloquial language and slang is that slang has not yet been accepted in
polite or formal conversation, whereas colloquialisms (e.g. ‘Good show!’) have been

stereotype – a fixed conventional (and often biased) view about what role a particular person is expected to play

strategy – a certain broad procedure or plan used to tackle a problem

 85 | P a g e
 stress (in a word or sentence) – to give force to a particular syllable in a word or a word in a sentence

style – The distinctive and unique manner in which a writer arranges words to achieve particular effects. Style
essentially combines the idea to be expressed with the individuality of the author. These arrangements include
individual word choices as well as such matters as length and structure of sentences, tone and use of irony.

subplot – subsidiary action which runs parallel with the main plot of a play or a novel

symbol – something which stands for or represents something else

synonym (as opposed to antonym) – a word which has the same meaning or almost the same meaning as
another word in the same language. Synonyms in English tend to have important differences in connotation

e.g. Envoyer and lancer

synthesise – the drawing together of ideas from a variety of sources; a clear summary of these combined ideas

text – a statement or creation in any written, spoken or visual form of communication

theme – the central idea or ideas in a text; a text may contain several themes and these may not be explicit or
obvious

tone – quality and timbre of the voice that conveys the emotional message of a spoken text. In written text, it is
achieved through words that convey the attitude of the writer. In film, tone can be created through music or
visual effects

transactional writing – functional writing (e.g. letters, minutes of meetings, reports, faxes)

Truncation – This type of abbreviation consists only of the first part of a word. These are most often used when
referring to proper titles such as months of the year or days of the week, e.g., Mon., Fri., Apr., Oct.

turn-taking conventions – the customs which govern the flow of conversation between people such as
allowing others to give their opinion, restating to clarify meaning, intervening to redirect focus, asking for
clarification

understatement – express something in restrained terms rather than giving the true or full facts, usually for
emphasis, possibly as a form of evasion, possibly as a form of humour

e.g. "Le récent désagrément" to refer to a war in a recent past.

verbosity – language using more words than are needed

visual texts – visual representations which can be seen and which convey messages (e.g. film images, photos,
computer graphics, cartoons, models, drawing, paintings)

voice – the author’s persona: who the author is; when reading or viewing one gains an impression of the author
and his/her intentions. See narrative voice

wit – the unexpected, quick and humorous combining of contrasting ideas or expressions

word-attack skills - strategies used when reading an unknown word (e.g. breaking it into syllables or looking
at the meaning of the prefixes or suffixes
e.g. Faire (to do) - Refaire (to do again)

 86 | P a g e
 Published by the Department of Basic Education

 222 Struben Street

 Private Bag X895, Pretoria, 0001

 Telephone: 012 357 3000 Fax: 012 323 0601

 ISBN: 978-1-4315-2689-5

 © Department of Basic Education
 website facebook twitter
www.education.gov.za www.facebook.com/BasicEd www.twitter.com/dbe_sa

 87 | P a g e