CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT

 GRADES 7-9

 MANDARIN SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE
 Department of Basic Education
222 Struben Street
Private Bag X895
Pretoria 0001
South Africa
Tel: +27 12 357 3000
Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street Private Bag X9023
Cape Town 8000
South Africa
Tel: +27 21 465 1701
Fax: +27 21 461 8110
Website: http://www.education.gov.za

© 2014 Department of Basic Education

ISBN: 978-1-4315-2068-8

 1|Page
 CONTENTS

SECTION 1 Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement 4

1.1 Background 4
1.2 Overview 4
1.3 General aims of the South African curriculum 5
1.4 Time allocation 6
 1.4.1 Foundation Phase 6
 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase 7
 1.4.3 Senior Phase 8
 1.4.4 Grades 10–12 8

SECTION 2 Introducing the Languages 10

2.1 Languages in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement 10
2.1.1 Language levels 10
2.1.2 The language skills 12
2.1.3 Language teaching approaches 12
2.2 Time allocation of Second Additional Language in the curriculum 14
2.3 Learning and Teaching Support Materials 15

SECTION 3 Content and Teaching Plans for Language Skills 17

3.1 Listening and speaking 17
3.1.1 Features and Conventions of Oral communication text 19
 3.1.1.1 Informal speaking and group work 19
 3.1.1.2 Formal speaking and presenting 20
 3.1.1.3 Speaking for specific purposes / contexts 20
 3.1.1.4. Expressions used in conversation – Reference list 21

3.2 Reading and viewing 23
3.2.1 Intensive Reading 24
 3.2.1.1 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for comprehension on word level 24
 3.2.1.2 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for comprehension atsentence
 and paragraph level 24
 3.2.1.3 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for comprehension at a whole text level
 24
 3.2.1.4 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for summary writing and note taking 24
 3.2.1.5 Intensive reading of multimodal and visual texts 24
3.2.2 Reading of Literary Texts/Genres 25

 2|Page
 3.3 Writing and presenting: process, content, strategies and texts 27
3.4 Language structures and conventions 29
3.5 Teaching plans 34
3.5.1 Spread of texts 37
3.5.1.1 Grade 7 39
3.5.1.2 Grade 8 53
3.5.2.3 Grade 9 68

SECTION 4: Assessment in the Second Additional Language 84

4.1 Introduction 84
4.2 Informal or daily assessment 84
4.3 Formal assessment 84
4.4 Programme of Assessment 86
 4.4.1 Overview of requirements 86
 4.4.2 Examinations 88
4.5 Recording and reporting 89
4.6 Moderation of assessment 89
 4.6.1 Formal assessment (SBA) 89
 4.6.2 Oral assessment tasks 90
4.7 General 90

 Glossary 91

 3|Page
 SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND
ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
1.1 Background
The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and
assessment in the schooling sector.
To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the
amendments coming into effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and
Assessment Policy document was developed for each subject to replace Subject Statements,
Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines in Grades R-12.

1.2 Overview
(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for
 learning and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements
 of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12 (January 2012).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) replaces the two current national
 curricula statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of 31 May
 2002, and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6 October
 2003 and No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii) comprise the following
 policy documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-
 12 (January 2012) during the period 2012-2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment
 Guidelines for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the General
 Education and Training Band, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in Government
 Gazette No. 29626 of 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette No.27819 of 20 July
 2005;

 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners

 4|Page
 with special needs, published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006, is
 incorporated in the policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion
 requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National
 Protocol for Assessment (Grades R-12), promulgated in Government Notice No.1267 in
 Government Gazette No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.=

(d) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy
 as contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South
 African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to
 determine minimum outcomes and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the assessment
 of learner achievement to be applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum
(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values
 worth learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply
 knowledge and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum
 promotes knowledge in local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 serves the purposes of:

 • equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical
 ability or intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-
 fulfilment, and meaningful participation in society as citizens of a free country;
 • providing access to higher education;
 • facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and
 • providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.
(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is based on the following principles:

 • Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed,
 and that equal educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;
 • Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather
 than rote and uncritical learning of given truths;
 • High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be
 achieved at each grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;
 • Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;
 • Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and
 practices of social and environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution

 5|Page
 of the Republic of South Africa. The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is
 sensitive to issues of diversity such as poverty, inequality, race, gender, language, age,
 disability and other factors;
 • Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this
 country as important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and
 • Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality,
 breadth and depth to those of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

 • identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;
 • work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;
 • organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;
 • collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;
 • communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;
 • use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the
 environment and the health of others; and
 • demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that
 problem solving contexts do not exist in isolation.
(e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This
 can only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to
 learning, and how to plan for diversity.

 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant
 support structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based Support Teams,
 Institutional-Level Support Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers
 in the classroom, teachers should use various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those included
 in the Department of Basic Education’s Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

1.4 Time Allocation
1.4.1 Foundation Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 GRADE R GRADES 1-2 GRADE 3
 SUBJECT
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)

 Home Language 10 8/7 8/7

 First Additional Language 2/3 3/4

 6|Page
 Mathematics 7 7 7

 Life Skills 6 6 7
 Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)
 Creative Arts (2) (2) (2)
 Physical Education (2) (2) (2)
 Personal and Social Well-being (1) (1) (1)

 TOTAL 23 23 25

(b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8
 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and
 a maximum of 3 hours for Additional Language in Grades 1-2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours
 and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours and a
 maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

(d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R – 2 and 2 hours as indicated by
 the hours in brackets for Grade 3.

1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS

 Home Language 6

 First Additional Language 5

 Mathematics 6

 Natural Sciences and Technology 3,5

 Social Sciences 3

 Life Skills 4
 Creative Arts (1,5)
 Physical Education (1)
 Personal and Social Well-being (1,5)

 TOTAL 27,5

 Schools offering an optional language on at least Second Additional Language level may do so if they
 can make an arrangement for the allocation of additional time to the allocated 27.5 hours.
 7|Page
 1.4.3 Senior Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS

 Home Language 5

 First Additional Language 4

 Mathematics 4,5

 Natural Sciences 3

 Social Sciences 3

 Technology 2

 Economic Management Sciences 2

 Life Orientation 2

 Creative Arts 2

 TOTAL 27,5

 Schools offering an optional language on at least Second Additional Language level may do so if they
 can make an arrangement for the allocation of additional time to the allocated 27.5 hours.

1.4.4 Grades 10-12

(a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)

 Home Language 4.5

 First Additional Language 4.5

 Mathematics 4.5

 Life Orientation 2

 12 (3x4h)
 A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group B Annexure B,
 Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National policy pertaining to the
 programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R-12, subject to the provisos stipulated in paragraph
 28 of the said policy document.

 TOTAL 27,5

 8|Page
 The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as
specified above, and may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum
subjects. Should a learner wish to offer additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for
the offering of these subjects.

 9|Page
 SECTION 2
INTRODUCING THE LANGUAGES

2.1 Languages in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement

Language is a tool for thought and communication. It is also a cultural and aesthetic means commonly
shared among a people to make better sense of the world they live in. Learning to use language
effectively enables learners to acquire knowledge, to express their identity, feelings and ideas, to
interact with others and to manage their world. It also provides learners with a rich, powerful and
deeply rooted set of images and ideas that can be used to make their world other than it is; better and
clearer than it is. It is through language that cultural diversity and social relations are expressed and
constructed, and it is through language that such constructions can be altered, broadened and refined.

2.1.1 Language levels
Language learning in the Senior Phase includes all the official languages in South Africa, namely,
Afrikaans, English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa, isiZulu, Sepedi (Sesotho sa Leboa), Sesotho, Setswana,
Siswati, Tshivenda, Xitsonga – as well as Non-official Languages. These languages can be offered at
different language levels.

Home Language is the language first acquired by learners while First Additional language is the language learnt
in addition to one’s home language. The Second Additional Language is the further language that a learner can
learn, that enables broader communication and multilingualism. The language may be in use within the
community or culture and will enhance nation building and intercultural understanding. Many South African
schools do not offer the home languages of some or all of the enrolled learners but rather have one or two
languages offered at home language level. As a result, the names Home Language, First Additional and Second
Additional Language refer to the proficiency levels at which the language is offered, and not the native (Home)
or acquired (as in the Additional) languages. For the purposes of this policy, any reference to Home Language
should be understood to refer to the level and not the language itself.

The Home Language level provides for language proficiency that reflects the mastery of basic
interpersonal communication skills required in social situations and the cognitive academic skills
essential for learning across the curriculum. Emphasis is placed on the teaching of the listening,
speaking, reading and writing skills at this language level. This level also provides learners with a
literary, aesthetic and imaginative ability that will provide them with the ability to recreate, imagine
and empower their understanding of the world they live in. However, the emphasis and the weighting
for listening and speaking from Grades 7 onwards are lower than those of the reading and writing
skills.

The First Additional Language refers to a language which is not a mother tongue but which is used
for certain communicative functions in a society, that is, medium of learning and teaching in
education. The curriculum provides strong support for those learners who will use their first additional
language as a language of learning and teaching. By the end of Grade 9, these learners should be able
to use their home language and first additional language effectively and with confidence for a variety
of purposes, including learning.

In South Africa, many children use their additional language, English, as the Language of Learning
and Teaching (LoLT). This means that they must reach a high level of competence in English. They
need to be able to read and write well in English.

 10 | P a g e
 The First Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge
of the language when they arrive at school. The focus in the first few years of school is on developing
learners’ ability to understand and speak the language – basic interpersonal communication skills. In
Grades 2 and 3 learners start to build literacy on this oral foundation. They also apply the literacy
skills they have already learned in their Home Language.

In the Intermediate and Senior Phases, learners continue to strengthen their listening, speaking,
reading and writing skills. At this stage the majority of children are learning through the medium of
their First Additional Language, English, and should be getting more exposure to it. Greater emphasis
is therefore placed on using the First Additional Language for the purposes of thinking and reasoning.
This enables learners to develop their cognitive academic skills, which they need to study subjects
like Natural Sciences, Mathematics, etc. in English. They also engage more with literary texts and
begin to develop aesthetic and imaginative ability in their Additional Language.

By the time learners enter Senior Phase, they should be reasonably proficient in their First Additional
Language with regard to both interpersonal and cognitive academic skills. However, the reality is that
many learners still cannot communicate well in their Additional Language at this stage. The challenge
in the Senior Phase, therefore, is to provide support for these learners at the same time as providing a
curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards required in further grades. These standards
must be such that learners can use their Additional Language at a high level of proficiency to prepare
them for further or higher education or the world of work. It is therefore recommended that, where
possible, learners in the Senior Phase be exposed to the same concepts in a two week cycle in both
language levels.

The Second Additional Language level also assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge of
the language when they arrive at school. The focus upon exposure to Second Additional Language is on
developing learners’ ability to understand and speak the language - basic interpersonal communication skills. In
Grades 4 - 6 learners start to build their oral and literacy skills. They also apply the oral and literacy skills they
have already learned in their Home and First Additional Languages.

In Grades 7 – 9 learners continue to strengthen their listening and speaking while developing their reading and
writing skills.

By the time learners enter Grade 10, they should be able to communicate in their Second Additional Language
at both interpersonal and social levels. However, the reality is that many learners still cannot communicate well
in their Additional Language at this stage. The challenge in Grades 10-12, therefore, is to provide support for
these learners at the same time as providing a curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards required in
Grade 12. These standards must be such that learners can use their additional language at a level of proficiency
to prepare them for further or higher education or the world of work.

Specific aims of learning Additional Languages
Learning a Second Additional Language should enable learners to:
 • acquire the language skills necessary to communicate appropriately in the target language at a basic
 level;
 • listen, speak, read/view and write the language with growing confidence and enjoyment. These skills
 and attitudes form the basis for life-long learning;
 • express their own ideas, views and emotions with confidence (orally and in writing), in order to
 become comfortable in the language;
 • use language and their imagination to find out more about themselves and the different cultures and the
 world around them. This will enable them to express their experiences and findings about the world
 orally and in writing;

 11 | P a g e
 • use language to access and manage communication in other contexts. Information literacy is a vital
 skill in the ‘information age’ and forms the basis for lifelong learning;
 • use language as a means for expressing information on familiar topics; for interacting with a familiar
 range of texts; and for reading texts for enjoyment, basic information and communication.

2.1.2 The language skills

The Second Additional Language curriculum is packaged according to the following skills:
 1. Listening and Speaking
 2. Reading and Viewing
 3. Writing and Presenting
 4. Language Structures and Conventions

2.1.3 Language Teaching Approaches

The approaches to teaching language in these documents are text-based, communicative, integrated
and process orientated.

The text-based approach and the communicative approach are both dependent on the continuous
use and production of texts. The text-based approach explores how texts work. The purpose of a
text-based approach is to enable learners to become competent, confident and critical readers, writers,
viewers and designers of texts. It involves listening to, reading, viewing and analysing texts to
understand how they are produced and what their effects are. Through this critical interaction, learners
develop the ability to evaluate texts. The text-based approach also involves producing different kinds
of texts for particular purposes and audiences. This approach is informed by an understanding of how
texts are constructed.

A communicative approach suggests that when learning a language, a learner should have a great
deal of exposure to the target language and many opportunities to practise or produce the language by
communicating for social or practical purposes. Language learning should be carried over into the
classroom where literacy skills of reading/viewing and writing/presenting are learned by doing a great
deal of reading and learning to write by doing much writing.

Language teaching happens in an integrated way, with the teacher modelling good practice, the
learners practising the appropriate skills in groups before applying these skills on their own. The
structure of each lesson should be one that engages the whole class before practising in groups and
applying the new skill individually.

The process approach is used when learners produce oral and written texts. The learners
engage in different stages of the listening, speaking, reading and writing processes. They
must think of the audience and the purpose during these processes. This will enable them to
communicate and express their thoughts in a natural way. For example, the teaching of
writing does not focus on the product only but also focus on the process of writing. During
process writing learners are taught how to generate ideas, to think about the purpose and
audience, to write drafts, to edit their work and to present a written product that
communicates their thoughts.

 12 | P a g e
 Approaches to teaching literature

The teaching of literature should focus on teaching for comprehension and will include the reading
process strategies (pre-reading, reading and post-reading). The main reason for reading literature in
the classroom is to develop in learners a sensitivity to a special use of language that is more refined,
literary, figurative, symbolic and deeply meaningful than much of what else they may read. While
most literary texts are forms of entertainment, amusement, or revelation, serious writers create novels,
plays and poems because they have ideas, thoughts and issues, principles, ideologies and beliefs that
they most want to share with or reveal to their prospective readers. Their imaginative use of language
is an added method of revealing, reinforcing and highlighting their ideas.
The teaching of literature is never easy, but it is impossible without the personal, thoughtful and
honest interpretations and comments from the learners themselves. Unless they learn how to
understand a literary text on their own, they will not have learned much. Teachers often need to
restrain their own interpretations and ideas of literary texts and allow as much learner participation as
is reasonable. Interpretation is not about right or wrong. It is about searching for what is meaningful
to the reader.

The best ways to approach the teaching of literature would involve some or all of the following.

 • Make every attempt to read as much of the text in class as possible without breaking for
 any other activity. This may take more than the scheduled two weeks for the Second
 Additional learner. It is essential that learners have a clear idea of what is going on at the
 most basic level of the text. Some classes can read texts without support. That is to be
 encouraged. Genres, and the approach to such, should be taught, rather than texts. For
 example, Poetry should be taught, not poems. Read as many as possible in class and
 ensure that learners write poems as well.

 • Literary interpretation is essentially a university level activity. Learners in this phase do
 not have to learn this advanced level of interpretation. However, the purpose of teaching
 literary texts is to show learners how the Second Additional Language can be used with
 subtlety, intelligence, imagination and flair. This means a close look at how text is being
 created, manipulated and re-arranged to clarify and emphasise what is being expressed.
 Such work might involve examining the presence or absence of imagery; what kind of
 imagery is being selected by the writer and why; sentence structures and paragraphing, or
 the layout of poems; choice of words, continuing motifs through the text; the use of
 symbol, sound and colour where appropriate. Most of this work should be text based

 • Creative writing should be closely attached to the study of any literary text. Writing
 activities that demand a close understanding of the text being read can prove very helpful
 in reaching more creative levels of appreciation on the part of the learners. Class
 discussions can be fruitful as long as everyone is involved. But class discussions that lead
 to written work activities serve a clearer purpose and benefit both.

 • Finally, it is important to point out that Literature is not about right answers. A whole text
 means something, not just bits and pieces of it. A good reading of a text incorporates the
 whole text in interpretative, creative, personal and exploratory practices.

The other approaches to literature which can be integrated with teaching for comprehension and for
understanding the key features of literature are the chronological, the author, the theme and the
genre approaches. These approaches can be combined.
In the chronological approach learners can research and combine the literature period with the
historical events for the same timeframe.
In the author approach, learners can participate in a broad and deep study of an author especially in
poetry and can link his/her poems with a particular historical period.
 13 | P a g e
 In the theme approach learners can look at themes such as justice, success, love, etc. across a
number of poems or across different genres and relate them to events in real life situations. They can
make judgments about the character’s actions and comment on the theme.
Regarding the genre approach, learners can classify, compare and contrast different types of literary
genre, e.g., the difference between the plots in a novel/ short story/drama/folklore.

Approaches to teaching language usage

The teaching of language structure should focus on how language is used and what can be done with
language, i.e. how to make meaning, how to attend to problems and interests, influence friends and
colleagues, and how to create a rich social life. The teaching of language structures should be a means
to getting things done.

The teaching of language structures/ grammatical structures should therefore be text-based,
communicative and integrated.

The following principles should be taken into consideration when teaching language structures:

 • Grammar should be taught for constructing texts in their context of use - it is concerned, in
 other words, with real language.
 • The application of grammar should not be restricted to the analysis of isolated sentences – it
 should explain the way in which sentences are structured to construct whole texts such as
 stories, essays, letters and reports which learners learn to read and write in school.
 • Use of authentic materials such as dialogues, interviews, must be encouraged
 • Link the language structure with functional uses of language in different social
 settings, e.g. expressing one’s thoughts or feelings; introducing people; talking
 about or reporting things, actions, events or people in the environment, in the
 past or in the future; making requests; making suggestions; offering food or
 drinks and accepting or declining politely; giving and responding to
 instructions; comparing or contrasting things.
 • Use classroom activities that relate language forms with functions, e.g. the past
 tense with a narrative essay and report writing;
 • Focus on meaningful tasks. Acquiring the grammatical rules of the language does
 not necessarily enable the learner to use the language in a coherent and meaningful
 way. What interests us then concerns the structure and function beyond the
 sentence level, i.e. the way in which people use either spoken language (discourse)
 or written language (text) in coherent and meaningful ways.
 • The issues of pronunciation and intonation should not be penalized unless they
 create communication breakdown.

2.2 Time allocation for the Second Additional Language

In a two-week cycle the following time allocation for the different language skills is suggested:

 Skills Time allocation Time Allocation per Two %
 per week Week Cycle (Hours)
 (Hours)
Listening & Speaking 1 25
Reading & Viewing: Comprehension & 2 1 25
Literature

 14 | P a g e
 Writing & Presenting 1 25
Language structures and conventions 1 25
(this is also integrated into the 4 skills)

The teaching time for Second Additional Language is 2 hours per week. All language content is
taught within a two-week cycle (4 hours). Teachers do not have to stick rigidly to this cycle but
must ensure that the language skills, especially reading and writing are practised. The time
allocation for the different language skills in Grade 7-9 is 36 weeks. Four weeks are for examination
purposes – two weeks for June examination and another two weeks for December examination.

2.3 Learning and Teaching Support Materials

Learners should have the following for Second Additional Language study in Grades 7 – 9:
 GRADES 7 – 9
 Core materials
 Prescribed language textbook √
 Dictionary √
 One of the following approved/prescribed literary *genres
 Short Novel √
 Short stories √
 Folklore √
 Short Drama √
 Poetry √
 Media materials
 Newspapers √
 Magazines √
 Radio talks/dramas √
 Television shows/ dramas / √
 documentaries

* Learners must have been exposed to three genres by the end of the phase, for example, one genre per
grade.

Second Additional Language teachers should have:
 a) A Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement
 b) Language in Education Policy
 c) The prescribed language textbook used by learners and other textbooks for resource
 purposes, in addition to the prescribed one
 d) Dictionary (monolingual, bilingual, multilingual, thesaurus)
 e) Relevant prescribed literature genres
 f) A variety of media materials: newspapers, magazines, brochures, flyers, etc.
 g) Access to audio/visual aids to be used in the classroom
 h) Other media resources (a variety of newspapers, magazines and brochures)

 15 | P a g e
 Classroom resources
a) A range of texts to accommodate different reading levels, e.g. a selection of readers with
 sufficient copies of texts at each level for the class.
b) A variety of media materials: newspapers, magazines, brochures, flyers, advertisements, posters,
 notices, etc.
c) Audio/visual aids

 16 | P a g e
 SECTION 3

 Content and Teaching Plans for Language Skills

This section is divided into TWO components: an overview of the skills, content and strategies and the Teaching
Plans.

3.1 Listening and Speaking
Listening and speaking are different but interdependent skills. Both are continually present informally in the
classroom as learners receive and discuss information. Formal listening and speaking of special forms, e.g. role
play or dialogue, need focused instruction. Formal and informal listening and speaking are integrated with
reading, writing and language practice, and while speaking may give written text an oral form (e.g. reading
aloud).

LISTENING

Listening process
Listening instruction will usually involve working through elements of the listening process. This is a three-
phase activity which models independent listening strategies for decoding and understanding speech and other
audio forms. Not every step of the process will be used on every occasion. For example, if learners are
listening to a recorded explanation they may need to do a reading as a pre-listening activity which alerts them
to the need for focused listening and helps them make associations with their own experience. Listening
activities would help them recall details. Post-listening might involve learners in responding to what they have
heard by answering simple questions.

Listening comprehension exercises and assessment give an opportunity to teach learners how to listen.

Listening process
1. Pre-listening introduces learners to the listening situation. It allows them to activate their previous
knowledge of the topic, and prepare for listening.
 • Stimulate /activate background knowledge before listening, so that their knowledge of that particular
 type of discourse is activated.
 • Predict what text may be about from title/discuss theme of text
 • Deal with any key vocabulary that learners may not be familiar with
 • Set a pre-listening question to focus learners’ attention
 • Prepare learners physically with, for example, pencil and pad for note taking

2. During listening learners pay attention for various purposes:
(Note that it is good practice for learners to listen to a text several times, focusing on a different aspect each
time.)
2.1 Listen for specific information
 • Search for meaning; identify main and supporting ideas
 • Constantly check understanding of message by making and confirming predictions and through
 questioning
 • Make meaningful notes; outline, map, categorize, summarize, retell, following instructions
 • Be aware of speaker / presenters’ body language and other visual cues

2. 2 Listen for interaction
 • Use turn-taking conventions in conversations or group work
 • Ask questions to sustain communication
 • Respond to language, gestures, eye contact and body language
 • Signal interest and attention appropriately through expression, posture etc
 • Use the appropriate conventions to be polite and show respect for others

 17 | P a g e
 2.3 Listen for appreciation
 • Respond to the aesthetic qualities of oral text, e.g. rhythm, pace, sound effects
 • Respond in communication situations
 • Use turn-taking conventions in conversations
 • Defend a position
 • Ask questions to sustain communication
 • Respond to language, gestures, eye contact and body language
 • Show understanding of the relationship between language and culture by showing respect for
 cultural conventions

3. Post-listening follows up on the listening experience. Learners
 • Answer questions
 • Review notes
 • Summarize
 • Transfer information from oral to written mode, e.g. use information to label a picture
 • Synthesize new information with prior knowledge
 • Draw conclusions, give own opinion;

Suggested length of texts to be used for listening comprehension
 Texts Grades Disjunctive Conjunctive
 orthography orthography
 • Oral, visual, audio-visual and multimodal 7 about at least 30 at least
 texts from the mass media seconds 30 seconds
 • Audio texts
 • Creative texts
 • Referential and informational texts
 • Texts for enrichment 8 at least 45 at least 45
 • Audio-visual texts (Films, television seconds seconds
 programmes and documentaries, slide
 shows, recordings, radio programmes,
 9 At least 1 At least 1 minute
 photographs, music videos)
 minute

SPEAKING

Speaking instruction needs to recognise a wide range of informal and formal speaking situations, from casual
conversation to formal speaking. Speaking clearly, fluently, coherently, confidently and appropriately should
be the aim of teaching speaking.

The teaching of speaking should include knowledge of the process and communication strategies.

The speaking process and strategies
The speaking process consists of the following stages:
• Planning: researching and organising
• Practising
• Presenting

Formal speaking and presenting
The formal speaking process will usually involve the above-mentioned three stages. Formal presentation forms
may involve a written or oral version which teachers may assess.

 18 | P a g e
 1. Planning: researching and organising
Learners demonstrate planning, researching and organizing skills for oral presentation. They

• Use resources and reference materials to find and select information
• Organize and write information; note-taking;
• Use an effective introduction and conclusion,
• Develop ideas orally in a logical manner
• Use objects, audio and/or visual aids to enhance the appeal and accuracy of presentations

2. Practising and presenting
Learners demonstrate oral presentation skills. They

• Use appropriate forms of address
• Show an awareness of audience;
• Show an awareness of situation: formal or informal speech
• Express own opinion
• Use correct language structures and conventions
• Use appropriate verbal and non-verbal techniques to reinforce meaning, e.g. tone, voice
 projection / modulation, volume, pace / tempo, phrasing, eye contact, facial expressions, gestures and
 body language
• Strive to speak with appropriate, clear intonation and pronunciation

Informal speaking and group work (see “Features and conventions of oral communication” below)
 • Initiate and sustain conversations
 • Ask and respond to questions to sustain communication
 • Use turn-taking conventions
 • Clarify meaning where appropriate
 • Respond to language, gestures, eye contact and body language
 • Signal interest and attention appropriately through expression, posture and gesture

3.1.1 Features and conventions of oral communication texts

3.1.1.1. Informal speaking and group work

 Speaking/ Purpose Features
 oral text
 form
 Informal To communicate • Initiate and sustain conversations
 conversation on given topics • Use turn-taking conventions
 / dialogue / • Fill in gaps and encourage the speaker
 group work • Clarify meaning where necessary
 • Ask and respond to questions to sustain communication
 See • Respond to language, gestures, eye contact and body language
 Expressions • Signal interest and attention appropriately through expression,
 used in posture and gesture
 conversation.
 Reference
 list
 Unprepared To share a text • Read fluently and audibly
 reading • Pronounce words without distorting meaning
 aloud

 19 | P a g e
 3..1.1.2. Formal speaking and presenting
See also general comments on planning and presenting above.

 Speaking/ Purpose Features
 oral text form
 Prepared Various: to • Conduct preparation / research
 speech inform / share • Organise material coherently. Choose and develop main ideas
 and support with examples
 This form • Use correct format, vocabulary, language and conventions
 will display • Use tone, voice projection, pace, eye contact, posture and
 evidence of gestures
 preparation • Use effective introduction and conclusion
 • Use appropriate style and register
 Incorporate appropriate visual, audio and/or audiovisual aids, e.g.
 charts, posters, objects, images
 Prepared To share a text • Read fluently and attentively according to purpose and task
 reading aloud written by self or • Pronounce words without distorting meaning
 other, e.g. to • Enhance meaning through tone, voice projection, pace, eye
 entertain contact, posture and gestures

3.1.1.3. Speaking for specific purposes / contexts

 Speaking/ Purpose Features
 oral text form
 Giving To tell someone • Use mostly the imperative form
 directions how to get • Use concise and clear sentences
 somewhere • Use chronological order
 • Refer to a specific direction
 • Indicate the approximate distance
 • Provide information about landmarks along the way
 Instructions To explain how to • Explain how to make / do something
 complete a task / • Mention the materials needed
 prepare food, etc. • Provide a clear, correct and logical sequence of instructions
 • Use appropriate vocabulary,

Suggested duration of oral communication
(Note: the approximate time to read one A4 page in disjunctive orthography is about 3 minutes)
 Texts Duration
 Grades 7-9
Conversations 5 – 10 minutes for group / class
Dialogues 1-2 minutes for a pair
Directions and instructions 1 minute
Prepared reading 1 minute
Prepared speeches 1 minute
Relating events Up to 2 minutes
Day-to-day oral communication, e.g. seeking assistance, 1 – 2 minutes
apologising

 20 | P a g e
 3.1.1.4 Expressions used in conversation – Reference list

 GREETINGS /打招呼 INTRODUCING ONESELF AND OTHERS/ 介绍
 ·你好！ ·我叫……
 ·……好!
 ·我是……
 ·……，您好吗？
 ·这(位)是……
 ·最近怎么样？

 EXPRESSING THANKS / 表示感谢 SAYING GOODBYE / 告别
 ·谢谢! ·再见!(再见!)
 ·非常感谢！ ·明天见!
 Long trips, vacations, short outings
 ·祝你一路顺风!
 ·祝你们一路平安!

 ACCEPTING / 接受 ASKING PERMISSION/ REQUESTING/ 请求

 Accepting a request ·请+verb

 ·好。 ·……吗?

 ·没问题。 ·……好吗?

 ·可以。 ·……可以吗?

 ·好吧! ·可以……吗？

 Accepting an invitation ·……行吗?

 ·行，我一定去。
 ·谢谢你的邀请，我一定参加。

 EXPRESSING AGREEMENT/ DISAGREEMENT / 表示（不） EXPRESSING POSSIBILITY / 表达可能性

 同意 ·这件事我能办到。

 Expressing agreement / 表示同意、赞成 ·verb+得+Complement, e.g. 吃得完；办得到
 ·你的意见很好，我非常赞成。 ·这不可能。

 ·太好了，我完全赞成! Verb+不+Complement, e.g. 吃不完；办不到
 Expressing disagreement / 表示不同意、不赞成
 ·我不同意。
 ·不好。(informal)

 21 | P a g e
 APOLOGISING / 道歉 ASKING TO REPEAT SOMETHING / 要求对方重复

·对不起。(没什么。) ·再说一遍好吗?

·请原谅。(算了，别往心里去了。) ·对不起，我没听懂，你能不能再说一遍?

·原谅我吧。(这不全是你的错。) ·对不起，请你再说一遍!

·都是我的错，请您多包涵!(看你说到哪儿去了。) ·老师，您再讲一遍好吗?

EXPRESSING DISSATISFACTION / 表达不满 STARTING A NEW TOPIC / 打开话题
 ·最近身体怎么样?.
·太+ Adj. +了,e.g. 这件大衣太贵了。
 ·最近忙什么呢?
·太+不+Adj. +了, e.g. 太不客气了。
 ·今天真冷!(好/暖和/凉快/热)
·using rhetorical questions, e.g. 你懂什么？
 ·昨天晚上看球了吧……
·有（一）点儿+Adj., e.g. 这件衣服有点儿小。
 ·好久不见了，怎么样?
·Adj. +了+点儿, e.g. 这道题难了点儿。

GIVING ADVICE / 建议 PROHIBITING STATEMENTS（often seen on a signs）
·我看…… / 禁止（常见于标牌）
·我想…… ·禁止抽烟
·我建议…… ·禁止乱倒垃圾
·是不是… ·此处禁止停车
·能不能…… ·闲人免进
·你最好……
·……，好不好？
·……，怎么样？

CONFIRMING BEING UNDERSTOOD / 确认对方是否听懂 INTERRUPTING / 打断他人的话
·你听明白了吗? ·对不起，我打断一下。
·我说的你记下来了吗? ·啊，我忽然想起来了，我再说一句。
·要不要我再说一遍? ·啊，我插一句话。
·我的话不知道说清楚了没有? ·对不起，我先说个事。
·您听清楚了吗?

CHANGING A TOPIC / 转换或转移话题 ENDING A CONVERSATION / 结束交谈
·谈到这里，我倒想起了一件事。 ·今天(这次)就谈到这儿吧。
·对了，说起… ·这个问题我们改日再谈吧。
·哎，哎，扯远了。 ·对不起，我该走了。
·还是回到刚才谈的话题上吧。 ·好了，就说到这儿吧。
·刚才我忘了，…… ·我说完了，谢谢。
·顺便问一句，…… ·今天我们谈得很愉快。
·对了，差点儿忘了，…… ·好了，该……了。

 22 | P a g e
 ·这事以后再说吧。

 WITHDRAWING FROM A CONVERSATION / 退出交谈
 ·你们谈，我还有点儿事，先走一步。
 ·你们谈着，我出去一下。
 ·对不起，我该走了。

3.2 Reading and Viewing
Reading / viewing combines two elements: 1) learning and applying strategies for decoding and understanding text
2) learning and applying knowledge of text features. Both aspects should be present in reading/ viewing instruction
of literary and non-literary texts.
Reading / viewing content is arranged in: 1) reading for comprehension and 2) extended independent reading.

Reading process
Reading instruction will usually involve working through elements of the reading process. This is a three-phase
activity which models independent reading strategies for decoding and understanding text. Not every step of the
process will be used on every occasion. For example, if learners are reading an unfamiliar text type or genre, they
will need to do a pre-reading activity which alerts them to surface features of this text type, and helps them make
associations with their own experience. Reading activities would help them analyse its structure and language
features in more detail. Post-reading might involve learners in trying to reproduce the genre in a written text of
their own.

Reading and viewing process

1. Pre-reading introduces learners to the text. It activates associations and previous knowledge.
 • Skimming and scanning text features: titles, headings, subheadings, captions, visual elements and graphic
 information, e.g., layout, icons, illustrations, graphs, charts, diagrams, maps, key words, word searches,
 pictures etc.
 • Predicting using the information gained from skimming and scanning
 • Dealing with any key vocabulary that may be unfamiliar to the learners

2. Reading involves making meaning of the text and paying close attention to its language features
 • Actively making sense of the text
 • Deducing the meaning of unfamiliar words and images by using word attack skills and contextual clues
 • Using comprehension strategies: making connections, monitoring comprehension, adjusting reading speed
 to text difficulty, re-reading where necessary, looking forward in the text for information that might help,
 asking and answering questions (from lower to higher order), visualizing, inferring, reading for main ideas,
 attending to word choice and language structures, recognizing the text type by its structure and language
 features
 • Making notes or summarising main ideas.

3. Post-reading enables the learners to view and respond to the text as a whole.
 • Answering questions on the text from lower order to higher order;
 • Comparing and contrasting;
 • Drawing conclusions and expressing own opinion
 • Reproducing the genre in writing of their own (where appropriate)

 23 | P a g e
 Examples of question types

 Knowledge questions 谁、什么、哪儿……

 Comprehension 爸爸是谁?
 questions

 Application questions 你能用这个动词造句吗? 你能用这个词再造一个句子吗?

 Analysis questions 他们一样吗？ 他们有不同吗? 为什么这个人喜欢……? 对不对？

 Evaluation questions 你喜欢哪个？

Selecting a text-type or genre
Teachers should ensure that learners read a range of texts and genres during the year. There should be a balance
between reading texts for comprehension, communication and enjoyment.

3.2.1 INTENSIVE READING

3.2.1.1 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for COMPREHENSION at a word level

Learners apply a variety of strategies to decoding texts. They build vocabulary through word-attack skills
and exposure.
 • Use dictionaries and other reference works to determine the meaning, pronunciation and parts of speech of
 unfamiliar words
 • Determine the meaning of words and their connection to word families using knowledge of same
 characters.
 • Use textual context (e.g., in-sentence definitions), cues (e.g., commas, quotes) and graphic cues (e.g. bold
 face) to determine the meaning of unfamiliar words
 • Recognize and use common, idioms and proverbs, e.g. 人山人海.
 • Distinguish between commonly confused words, e.g. 士/土; 漂亮/好看
 • Recognise some abbreviations, e.g. 约堡（约翰内斯堡）; 大二（大学二年级）
 • Apply knowledge of grammar to decode meaning.

3.2.1.2 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for COMPREHENSION at sentence and paragraph level

Learners apply their grammatical knowledge to understand sentence construction and the organisation of
texts. Text study at this level provides an opportunity for integrated teaching of language structures.
 • Identify and use the meaning and functions of language structures and conventions in texts.

3.2.1.3 Intensive reading of shorter written texts for COMPREHENSION at a whole text level

Learners apply their knowledge of genre to understand the meaning, intention and effect of the whole text
 • Relate the text to their own experience
 • Draw conclusions; form own opinion

3.2.1.4 Intensive reading of shorter texts for SUMMARY AND NOTE TAKING.

Learners apply their understanding of text features to summarise text. See reading strategies above.
 • Skim and scan for main ideas and theme
 • List main ideas

3.2.1.5 Intensive reading of MULTIMODAL AND VISUAL TEXTS (Multimodal texts make use of visual and
written material in a single text e.g. advertisements, cartoons. They can also combine this with spoken
 24 | P a g e
 language and gesture.)

Learners apply their knowledge of images and visual elements to understand how these support writing in
multimodal texts.
 Identify and discuss the purpose and message of visual texts created for enjoyment and entertainment, e.g.
 film, cartoons, music videos, comic strips

3.2.2 READING OF LITERARY TEXTS / GENRES

Learners read to enjoy and appreciate literary texts / genres and they respond to questions of comprehension. They
understand the basic features of different literary forms, e.g. that a poem has different characteristics from a short
story.

EXTENDED INDEPENDENT READING / VIEWING

Learners practise the strategies modelled in intensive reading for pleasure. Teacher guidance on access and
level is crucial to this part of the reading.
 • Access libraries and know book storage conventions
 • Read / view a variety of whole texts, e.g. books, magazines, newspapers, websites and films after class.

 25 | P a g e
 TEXTS USED FOR THE INTEGRATED TEACHING OF LANGUAGE SKILLS
 GRADES 7 - 9
In addition to literary texts for formal study, texts to be covered in grades 7 – 9 include written, visual and
multimedia texts with different purposes. Some texts will be studied for their aesthetic qualities; some texts will be
studied as examples and as models for writing
A range of literary texts to be Written texts for information Multimedia / visual texts for
read. Dictionaries information
 Encyclopaedias Charts, maps
Recommended Genres Schedules Graphs, tables, pie charts
The following recommended literary Telephone directories Mind-maps, diagrams
genres as included in the National Textbooks Posters
Literature Catalogue: Thesaurus Flyers, pamphlets, brochures
 Timetables Signs and symbols
Short Novel TV guides TV documentaries
 Web pages, internet sites, blogs
Short stories / Folklore Written texts in the media Facebook and other social networks
(Grades 7 – 1 story) Magazine articles Data projection
(Grade 8 – 1 story) Newspaper articles Transparencies
(Grade 9 – 2 stories) Editorials
 Notices Multimedia / visual texts for
Short Drama Advertisements aesthetic purposes
 Written forms of audio texts Films
Poetry Dialogues Photographs
(Grade 7 – 2 poems) Speeches Illustrations
(Grade 8 – 2 poems) Songs
(Grade 9 – 3 poems) Multimedia / visual texts for
 Written interpersonal and enjoyment and entertainment
Enrichment transactional texts Films
Films Letters TV programmes
Selected TV series/ documentaries Diaries Music videos
Radio dramas Invitations Cartoons, caricatures
Essays Emails Comic strips
Biographies sms’s, twitter, QQ, wechat Graffiti
Autobiographies Notes
Folk tales Reports Audio texts / Acoustic impulses
Myths and legends Radio programmes
 Written interpersonal texts in Readings of dramas or texts
 business Readings of novels or short stories
 Recorded speeches

 Advertisements on radio, TV
 newspapers and magazines

Length of written texts to be read for intensive reading / comprehension and summary
 Grades
Text for reading aloud 7 40 – 70 words/ 60-90 characters
 8 70 – 90 words / 90-120 characters
 9 90 – 110 words / 120-150 characters
Comprehension 7 40 – 70 words / / 60-90 characters
 8 70 – 90 words / 90-120 characters
 9 90 – 110 words/ 120-150 characters
 7 40 characters
Summary 8 50 characters
 9 60 characters

 26 | P a g e
 3.3 Writing and presenting: process, content, strategies and texts
Writing and presenting combines three elements: 1) using the writing process 2) learning and applying knowledge of the
structure and features of different text types 3) learning and applying knowledge of paragraph and sentence structure
and punctuation
Writing process
Writing instruction will usually involve working through the writing process. However, not every step of the process
will be used on every occasion. For example, if learners are writing a familiar text type, they will not need to analyse its
structure and language features in so much detail. There may also be occasions when teachers need to focus on sentence
structure or paragraph writing, or learners write texts without drafts in preparation for the examination.

Selecting a text-type
Teachers should ensure that learners write a range of texts during the year. There should be a balance between different
types of texts and writing for different purposes: transactional texts, creative, personal/interpersonal, texts etc.
Teachers should choose a text type and an appropriate topic to write about, for example, narrative/descriptive paragraph
on the topic: “My favourite food.”

Steps in process writing
Pre-writing
• Expose learners to relevant vocabulary and similar text type.
• Brainstorm ideas for the topic

Planning
• Create a plan for the text using the structure and ideas discussed in the pre-writing stage
• Identify main ideas for example, by using a mind map
• Sequence ideas in a logical order so that they make sense

Drafting
• Write a rough first draft that takes into account purpose, audience, topic and text type
• Choose appropriate words.
• Organise ideas in a logical sequence so that a story makes sense
• Organise ideas and/or images
• Read drafts critically and get feedback from teacher

Revising, editing, proofreading and presenting
• Evaluate their own and others’ writing for improvement using set criteria
• Refine word choice, sentence and paragraph structure
• Work on the sequencing and linking of paragraphs
• Use grammar and punctuation correctly
• Prepare the final draft including layout
• Present the text

Learners apply their knowledge of language structures and conventions to writing texts

Word choice
• Know and use a range of vocabulary
• Know what part of speech a word is and how to use it in a sentence
• Know whether a word is formal, informal, or slang (or offensive) and how to use it appropriately (or not at all)
• Use monolingual and bilingual dictionaries and thesauruses to expand vocabulary
• Keep a personal dictionary or vocabulary book to expand vocabulary

Sentence construction
• Write simple and compound sentences
• Use conjunctions to join clauses in compound sentences: e.g. 虽然……但是, 又……又, 不但……而且

Punctuation

 27 | P a g e
 • Know and be able to use the following punctuation marks appropriately and accurately: full stop, comma, colon,
 semi-colon, hyphen, dash, apostrophe, question mark, exclamation mark, brackets, quotation marks

Paragraph writing
• Write paragraphs that are logically sequenced

Register
• Use an appropriate register.

Text types – structure and language features

The tables below describe the range of text types that learners should be taught to write in Grades 7 - 9; other texts could
also be included where appropriate.

Creative texts

 Text type Purpose Text structure Language features
 Narrative/ To entertain Logical development of Written in the first or third person
 叙述 paragraph Events described sequentially
 Could make use of 了,着,过
 Could make use of dialogue

 Descriptive /描述 To describe Description: e.g. What is Creates a picture in words
 something happening in a picture Uses adjectives, adverbs

Longer and Shorter Transactional texts

 Text type Purpose Text structure Language features
 Diary entries To record Usually written in a special book (a diary Could make use of 了, 着,
 /日记 personal or a journal) 过
 experience / plan Entries written regularly (e.g. daily or Informal in style but not
 ahead weekly) offensive
 Entries dated The writer is writing for
 him or herself
 Friendly To inform and Address, date and salutation Usually informal in style
 letter / 信件 maintain a Structure of message will vary depending Language features will
 relationship on purpose (e.g. describing your family vary according to purpose
 or house of message
 Closing, signature
 Dialogue / Communication Introduction and conclusion Punctuation
 会话 Specific features of dialogue Direct speech
 Question words
 Invitation To invite May take the form of a personal letter or Can be formal or informal
 cards / someone to an use an invitation card. Includes: in style
 邀请函 event or to do Nature of the event Generally concise - brief
 something Where it will take place and to the point
 Date and time
 May include dress code
 Name of invitee
 May include RSVP
 May have a visual, design element
 Postcard / To inform and Salutation, address or email format Generally concise
 Message / communicate Can be formal or informal
 Email/ 明信 in style
 片/ 短信/ 电
 子邮件

 28 | P a g e
 Texts for enrichment

 Text type Purpose Text structure Language features
 For Various e.g. to Will vary according to the purpose e.g. The person completing the
 enrichment: apply for a 姓名, 地址, 年龄, 学校 form should be concise,
 Filling in forms/ library card accurate, formal, neat
 填表 (writing should be legible)
 Flyer / 传单 To persuade Small size e.g. A5 paper Speaks directly to the
 someone to buy Eye-catching headline reader
 something or Brief description of product Concise language
 use a service List of benefits or offers Language used to create an
 Contact information e.g. website impact on the reader e.g.
 May have a visual, design element adverbs, adjectives
 Advertisement / To persuade Can take a variety of forms Impact on the reader e.g.
 广告 someone to buy Usually have a visual, design element adverbs, adjectives
 something or Use advertising techniques Use of punctuation
 use a service Use design to make the advertisement
 eye-catching and memorable
 Giving To describe or Logical set of instructions to achieve a Written in the imperative
 instructions, instruct how purpose. e.g. Turn right at the shop
 directions and something is In chronological order e.g.
 rules / 指令语 done through a 首先……其次……然后
 series of Use of numbers and bullet
 sequenced steps points to signal order

Length of written texts to be produced

 Texts Grades
 Paragraphs: narrative and descriptive 7 40 characters
 8 50 characters
 9 60 characters
 Longer Transactional texts: Friendly letters / dialogue 7-9 30-50 characters (content only)

 Shorter transactional texts: Advertisements/ Diary entries/ 7-9 20-30 characters (content only)
 Postcards/ Invitation cards/ Filling in forms/ Directions/
 Instructions/ Flyers/ Posters/ emails / message

3.4 Language structures and conventions – reference list
 The following language structures will be taught in the context of reading and writing, and also as part of a
 systematic grammar programme. Some of the structures will have been introduced in earlier grades but may
 still need to be revised.

 NB: The unique features of the language must be taken into consideration. As a result, only features
 applicable to a specific language should be given attention in the text below.
 Nouns/名词 Common (e.g.学生) and proper nouns (e.g. 中国)

 Abstract nouns e.g 精神

 Direction nouns e.g. 上(边／面)、下（边／面）、左（边／面）、右（边／面）、前（边
 ／面）、后（边／面）
 Measure Measrure words for nouns e.g. 个、张、件

 29 | P a g e
 Words /量词 Measure words for verbs e.g. 次、回

 Position of measure words: Numerals + Measure words + Nouns e.g. 一个人、一件衣服

 Verbs + Numerals + Measure words e.g. 读两遍、看一眼
Pronouns/ Personal pronouns: 我、你、他、我们、你们、他们 别人
代词 Reflexive pronouns: 自己

 Interrogative pronouns: 谁、什么、哪儿、哪里、怎么样

 demonstrative pronouns: 这、那

Adjectives / Position of adjectives：

形容词 Adj.+ Nouns e.g. 漂亮的女孩

 V. +得＋ Adv. + Adj. e.g. 走得很快
Adverbs/ Adverbs of negation e.g.不、没有
副词 Adverbs of manner e.g.忽然、悄悄

 Adverbs of time e.g. 已经、刚、刚才、马上、立刻

 Adverbs of frequency e.g. 一直、常常、经常、从

 Adverbs of degree e.g.非常、很、十分、太

 Adverbs of scope e.g. 都、也

 Position of Adverbs: Adv. + V. e.g. 经常去中国、都学习外语 ;
 Adv. + adj. e.g. 很大、非常好吃

Prepositions/ Place and direction e.g .在、从…到、向

介词 Time e.g. 从…到

 Concerning e.g.对

 With e.g. 跟

 Positions of Prepositions: Prepostions + Nouns e.g. 在学校、从两点到五点

Existential Subjects+ 在 + Nouns + direction nouns e.g. 图书馆在办公楼的西边。

sentences Nouns + direction nouns + 有 + nouns e.g. 桌子上有两本书。

/存现句 Nouns + direction nouns + 是 + nouns e.g. 办公楼西边是图书馆。

 Nouns + direction nouns+V+着 ＋ Noun(phrases) e.g. 桌子上放着一盆花。

Aspect 了

Particles/ Subject + Verb + 了+ Objects e.g. 他买了五本书。

动态助词 了 at the end of a sentence e.g. 我们已经出发了。我昨天去南京路了。 他吃了四碗饭了。

 过

 Subjects + Verb + 过（＋objects) e.g. 他去过北京。

 着

 Sujects + 着+ objects e.g. 他穿着白色衣服。

 30 | P a g e
 Progressive Subjects + (正) 在+ V+(Objects)+（呢） e.g. 张老师（正）在上课呢。

aspect /

进行态

Structural 的

particles/ Nouns/pronouns + 的 + Nouns e.g. 妈妈的衣服、她的书

结构助词 Adjective + 的 + Nouns e.g. 可爱的小孩

 地

 Adj.+ 地 + Verbs e.g. 快乐地生活

 得

 Verbs +得 + (adv.)+ Adj. e.g. 走得很快

Modal Verbs/ To express ability：会 、能 e.g. 我会说汉语。她能做很多中国菜。

能愿动词 To express permission：可以 e.g. 这里可以吸烟吗？

 To express willingness ：愿意 e.g. 我愿意帮助她。

 To express “should" ：应该 e.g 你应该去上课。

Sentence statements

structures/ Subjects + verbs + Objects e.g. 我爱妈妈。

基本句型 Subjects + Adverbs + adjectives e.g. 她很聪明。

 Subjects + Nouns e.g.我儿子两岁。

 Questions

 general questions: statements + 吗? e.g. 你去上课吗？

 WH questions: e.g. 你叫什么名字？他是谁？ 你要去哪儿？

 Affiemative-negative questions : subjects + Adj. 不 Adj.? e.g. 那件衣服贵不贵？

 subjects + V 不 V (+objets) ？ e.g. 你来不来？

 subjects + V 没 V (+objects)? e.g. 你吃没吃早饭？

 Alternative questions : …还是… e.g. 你喝茶还是喝咖啡？

 你去还是我去？

 Imperatives

 V.(+Objects) e.g. 接电话！

 别＋V (+Objects) e.g. 别吃这个。

Adverbials/ Positions of Adverbials: before verbs

状语
 To express time:

 31 | P a g e
 subjects + time + V; Time + Subjects + V e.g. 我六点吃早饭。 明天我去你家。

 To express place:

 Subjects + place + V e.g. 我在图书馆看书。

 To express manner:

 Subjects （+Adv.）+ Adj.+ 地+ V. e.g. 他很认真地听老师说话。

Complements/ To express results:

补语 V.+ adj. e.g 房间打扫干净了。

 V. + 完 e.g. 本子用完了。

 V. + 到 e.g. 汉语书买到了。

 V. + 好 e.g. 晚饭做好了。

 To express duration:

 V.+ durations + Objects eg. 看三小时电视。

 V.+ Objects + V. + durations e.g. 看电视看三小时

 To express degree:

 V.+ 得 +Adv.+Adj e.g. 说得很快

 V. + objects + V. + 得(+ Adv.) + adj. e.g. 说汉语说得很快

 To express directions:

 V.+来／去 e.g. 上来 、上去、下来、下去、进来、出去

 V.+ 上／下＋来／去 e.g. 拿上来、搬下去

 V.+进／出＋来／去 e.g. 跑进来、走出去

Comprative A + 比+ B + Adj e.g. 小王比小张高。

structures / A + 没有 + B + Adj. e.g. 小张没有小王高。

比较句

把 structure/ Subjects + 把+ Objects + V. + Adj e.g. 你把衣服洗干净。

把字句 Subjects + 把 + Objects + V. + Prepositions + place

 e.g. 他把水果放在桌子上。把椅子搬到小房间里。

 Sb.1 + 把+ objects + （V.）给 + Sb.2 e.g. 他把作业交给了老师。 把书给我。

Vocabulary Synonyms, antonyms

development Figures of speech (simile, metaphor, personification)
and figurative Idiomatic expressions/idioms/proverbs
language/ Borrowed words
词汇和修辞

Punctuation/ colon, semi-colon, apostrophe, quotation marks, parentheses, ellipses, exclamation marks,

 32 | P a g e
 标点符号 question marks, comma

Connectors/ Logical connectors to link sentences in a paragraph:

连词、复句 To connect words/pgrases:和 、又……又…… e.g. 中国和南非 、又聪明又努力

 To connect clauses/sentences:

 addition: 也、又……又……、不但……而且……e.g. 我喜欢游泳，也喜欢打乒乓。

 她又想学法律又想学音乐。

 他不但会说汉语，而且中国歌也唱得很好。

 sequence in time: 先……然后…… e.g. 我先去食堂吃饭，然后去看球赛。

 ordering ideas： 首先／第一……，其次……／第二……，最后……。

 cause/effect： 因为……所以……。 e.g. 因为很忙，所以我没有去。

 but:（虽然）……，但是……。 e.g.虽然来中国只有一个月，但是他已经有了很多中国朋

 友。

 conditional: 如果……就……。 e.g. 如果你觉得累，就在家休息。

 33 | P a g e
 3.5. TEACHING PLANS

This document suggests that each cycle will include one or more units focused on each of the skills: listening,
speaking, reading, viewing, writing, presenting and language. Each cycle will provide activities for learners to
study, read or view a series of oral, written and visual texts. In each cycle the activities would draw learners’
attention to correct grammar and text types. Over a year, approximately 18 of these cycles would cover all
aspects of the curriculum in 36 weeks. In addition, the level of difficulty in all areas would increase from term
to term and year to year in the Senior Phase. Progression therefore also becomes part of the organizing of
learning programmes. This structure gives learners and teachers the opportunity to build context, to consolidate
vocabulary, and to become familiar with language structures over two weeks before moving on to other skills.
At the same time it offers variety and can be tailored to the interests of a group. For example, “Clothes” is a
common teaching theme, but could be followed by a cycle on weather.

Integrated language teaching: the teaching cycle

In practice, integration suggests variety: variety of forms, of activities, of texts and themes (see Suggested
Themes – Reference List below). When designing an integrated two-week cycle, the teacher may cluster
activities around a topic e.g. Sport. The sequence of lessons in a two-week cycle can follow any order, e.g. a
cycle might start with reading, and progress to role play (speaking) which is followed by writing. Any text can
be used for the activities outlined below.

The teacher should choose a literary text for study. This may be poems, a short novel, a short story or a short
drama (see “Texts used for integrated teaching of language skills.”) The teacher may choose to teach any order
for teaching texts. If the teacher chooses a longer continuous text such as short novel or short drama it is
suggested that it is taught continuously so that learners do not forget details of the message. If a short novel or
short drama is chosen, the teacher will need to divide the text into as many units as there is time available.
Additional sections of the work will be read as homework or part of the extended reading.

This curriculum presents an explicit grammar focus. In practice language will take about an hour every two
weeks, with half taught in context with writing and reading, and half taught explicitly. In addition to planned
grammar teaching there will be remedial teaching or revision of language drawn from learners’ writing errors.

 Suggested Themes – Reference List
 • Animals • House
 • Body • Likes and dislikes
 • Clothes • Music
 • Colours • Nature/environment
 • Days and Months • Places
 • Emotions • School
 • Family • Sport
 • Food • Time
 • Greetings • Transport
 • Hobbies • Weather and seasons

 34 | P a g e
 Turning the Teaching Plan into teaching and learning activities

An example based on TEACHING PLAN Grade 7, Term 1, Weeks 1 and 2 (6 x 40 minute lessons) = 4 hours
teaching

 GRADE 7 TERM 1
 Weeks Listening & Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures
 Speaking 1 hour 1 hour and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and
 explicit)
 Listening for Reading for Creative: A few simple adjectives
 specific comprehension on Descriptive paragraph
 information: a word and Vocabulary in context
 sentence level: e.g. Write a descriptive
 Teach features of paragraph
 listening for E.g. Dialogues
 information between people Introduce process writing
 greeting each other stages:
 Class listens to e.g. a for the first time, • Planning
 recording of a asking who they are • Drafting
1 and 2

 dialogue on meeting and how they are • Proofreading
 and greeting doing • Editing and
 rewriting
 Informal speaking: • Presenting
 Class practise to Write sentences practising
 meet and greet in how to introduce and
 pairs describe someone to
 others – then make a
 descriptive paragraph
 using these sentences in a
 logical order.

 35 | P a g e
 Cycle theme: Meeting and greeting

Lesson 1: (Mainly listening and speaking)
 • Introduction: Greet class and introduce yourself. Teach learners how to introduce themselves.
 • Vocabulary relevant to the theme.
 • Teach features of listening for information

Lesson 2: (Mainly listening and speaking)
 • Listen various times to a dialogue of people greeting each other.
 • Learners practise in pairs to meet and greet.

Lesson 3: (Mainly reading)
 • View pictures, titles and headings of dialogues.
 • Learners read silently, after which teacher repeats reading aloud, while learners try to understand
 dialogues.
 • Teacher explains grammar and vocabulary
 • Homework: Learners reread the dialogues and answer questions, e.g. true / false.

Lesson 4: (Mixed)
 • Some integrated grammar features of the text
 • Explain the writing process
 • Learners read examples of descriptive paragraphs
 • Homework: Learners practise writing simple sentences introducing and describing someone, using
 grammar as explained.

Lesson 5: (Mainly writing)
 • Learners write the descriptive paragraph

Lesson 6: (Writing)
 • Learners edit and rewrite the first draft of their paragraph

 On the following pages Teaching Plans are provided for each of grades 7, 8 and 9. Please note that
 these are only EXAMPLES of how to organise the teaching of the Second Additional Language over
 the period of a year.

 36 | P a g e
 3.5.1 Spread of texts table

 Weeks Grade 7 Grade 8 Grade 9
 Term 1
 1&2 Information text e.g. Information text e.g. Dialogue
 dialogue dialogue
 3&4 Song or poem Rhyme, song, poem Rhyme, poem/song

 5&6 Information text: visual, Information text e.g. Information text – filling in
 e.g. calendar pictures a form
 7&8 Information text: dialogue Visual text, e.g. Visual text - pictures
 pictures, cartoon
 9&10 Reading text Information text Information text –
 dialogue/speech
 Term 2
 1&2 Information text: dialogue Information text e.g. Instruction, e.g. giving
 picture direction
 Short story/folklore
 3&4 Information text, e.g. map Information text e.g. Information text, e.g.
 schedule/ diary/ timetable giving direction
 5&6 Information text: visuals Information text e.g. Information text – Weather
 pictures report, map, poem, song
 7&8 Poem or song Information text e.g. games Information text – Weather
 and dialogue report, map, poem, song
 9&10 SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

 Term 3
 1&2 Transactional text, e.g. Vocabulary text Comprehension and
 letter reading text
 3&4 Visual text, e.g. picture Instructional text, e.g. Visual text
 recipe dialogue
 5&6 Information text, e.g. Information text e.g. Visual text
 dialogue radio/TV programme
 7&8 Information text, e.g. map Information text e.g. Information text, e.g.
 Poem, short story, novel or dialogue dialogue, pictures
 drama
 9&10 Story, poems, songs, Short story / poems / songs / Short story/songs/ drama/
 cartoon, drama and novel short drama / short novel novel/poem
 Term 4
 1&2 Visual text Vocabulary text Visual text

 3&4 Information text poem / song / story Information text, e.g.
 dialogue
 5&6 Information text Visual text, poem Vocabulary text

 37 | P a g e
 7&8 Song, poem Creative and transactional Song, poem
 texts

9&10 SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT

 38 | P a g e
 3.5.1.1 Grade 7

 GRADE 7 TERM 1
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for specific Reading for comprehension on Creative: A few simple adjectives
 information: a word and sentence level: Descriptive paragraph
 Use of the structure “欢迎+某人+来/
 Teach features of E.g. Dialogues between people Introduce process writing stages: 去+某地”, e.g. 欢迎你们来南非。
 listening for information greeting each other for the first • Planning
 time, asking who they are and • Drafting Vocabulary in context
 Class listens to e.g. a recording how they are doing • Proofreading
 of a dialogue on meeting and • Editing and rewriting
 greeting • Presenting
 1 and 2

 Informal speaking: Write a descriptive paragraph
 Class practise to meet and greet Write sentences practising how to
 in pairs introduce and describe one to others –
 then make a descriptive paragraph using
 these sentences in a logical order.

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 39 | P a g e
 Listen for appreciation: Literary text: Longer Transactional: Direct speech
 Introduce process writing stages:
 Listen to a song / poem.. Read poem / song e.g. the same • Planning Interrogatives
 as used in listening for • Drafting
 Formal Speaking: comprehension • Proofreading Punctuation
 and appreciation • Editing and rewriting
 E.g. Role play on meeting and • Presenting Introduce new verb(s)
3 and 4

 greeting
 Write a dialogue The structure “虽然……可是……”,
 e.g.花园虽然小，可是很漂亮。
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed. Remedial grammar from learners’
 writing

 Vocabulary in context

 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)

 40 | P a g e
 Listening for information and Reading for comprehension at Creative text:
 comprehension: a word and sentence level: Nouns
 E.g. Make own timetable in target
 E.g. the days of the week, Introduce features of visual text language / Fill in a form according to Verbs
 months of the year and numbers. listening exercise
 View and discuss various visual Telling Time
 Information to be filled in a form texts e.g. a picture, photograph Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
5 and 6

 e.g. a calendar, be used if needed. The structure “除了……（以外），
 Days of the week, E.g. View a school timetable 还……”,e.g.星期五除了有汉语课以
 Months of the year 外，还有数学课。
 and
 Informal Speaking and group Vocabulary in context
 work: E.g. read a text on the theme
 “School”
 Groups ask each other questions
 and answers using e.g. a visual
 text such as a calendar
 Listening for comprehension Reading for comprehension: Creative:
 Verbs
 E.g. listen to a dialogue of E.g. Read a text of learners E.g. Write sentences using the vocabulary
 learners expressing which expressing their favourite in context. Write a dialogue about the Adjectives
 subjects they like / dislike subjects subjects they prefer.
 Use of the structure “不但……而
7 and 8

 Formal speaking and and Characters are preferred, and pinyin could 且……”,e.g.我不但喜欢数学，而且
 presenting: be used if needed. 喜欢汉语。
 E.g. Answer comprehension
 E.g. Learners introduce questions on the text. Remedial grammar from learners’
 themselves and say which writing
 subjects they prefer
 Vocabulary in context

 41 | P a g e
 Listening for appreciation / Reading for comprehension: Creative / Transactional: Verbs, adjectives
 specific information:
 E.g. Read a text on chosen theme E.g. Sentence writing / Simple conjunctions
 E.g. Listening comprehension on Label pictures on the chosen theme and
 chosen theme explain the preferred picture Reinforcement of grammar covered in
 first term.
 Informal Speaking and group Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
9 and 10

 work: be used if needed. Use of the structure “ 因为……所
 以……”,e.g. 因为我妈妈是中国人，
 E.g. Saying why they like a 所以我学习汉语。
 certain subject
 Remedial grammar from learners’
 or writing
 Prepared reading aloud of text on Vocabulary: in context
 e.g. chosen theme
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1
 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Oral: Listening comprehension / Writing: Creative (Narrative / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Test 1: Comprehension and
Prepared Speaking / Prepared Reading Transactional (Shorter or longer) text Language
aloud

 GRADE 7 TERM 2
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)

 42 | P a g e
 Listening for specific Reading for comprehension on Shorter Transactional: Prepositions
 information sentence level:
 Process writing stages: Punctuation
 E.g. Listen to a dialogue of E.g. Read dialogues between • Planning
 learners saying where they come people coming from different • Drafting Basic Conjunctions
 from places / countries • Proofreading
1 and 2

 • Editing and rewriting Negatives
 Speaking for specific purposes / • Presenting
 Formal speaking and presenting Use of the structure “某人+从+某地
 (Prepared Reading aloud) E.g. Learners write a narrative paragraph +来”, e.g. 我从中国来。
 to tell where they come from
 E.g. Prepared Reading aloud on Vocabulary in context
 the chosen theme Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.
 Listening for specific Reading for comprehension on Short Transactional: Adjectives
 information: word and sentence level:
 E.g. Writing for a specific purpose Punctuation
 E.g. use visual text such as a map E.g. Read a text in which
 to listen to, ask and answer nationalities of different people Process of writing a prepared speech. Basic Conjunctions
 questions. are evident.
 Process writing stages: Prepositions
 Formal speaking and • Planning
3 and 4

 presenting: • Drafting Negatives
 • Proofreading
 Discuss the features of prepared • Editing and rewriting Use of the structure “某处+有+数量
 speech • Presenting 名’,e.g.图书馆旁边有一家咖啡
 馆。
 Prepared speech
 Remedial grammar from learners’
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could writing
 be used if needed.
 Vocabulary in context

 43 | P a g e
 Listening for specific Intensive reading of Visual Creative: Imperative
 information: Texts:
 Listening Comprehension E.g. New verbs
 View and interpret the features of Draft a descriptive paragraph on a chosen
 Informal speaking e.g. a picture of the classroom picture, following the process writing
5 and 6

 Use of the structure “某处+在+名词
 approach – group activity +方位词”,e.g.洗衣机在卫生间里。
 Informal Speaking: E.g. classroom
 discussion on interpretation of Characters are preferred, and pinyin could Remedial grammar from learners’
 pictures be used if needed. writing

 Vocabulary in context
 Listening for appreciation: Reading for comprehension: Shorter Transactional: Negative

 E.g. listen to a poem / song Read a text based on a family or E.g. Write a descriptive paragraph about Possessives
 dedicated to a family family relationships their family
 Identify and reinforce the different
 Informal speaking and group Process writing stages: language structures and conventions.
7 and 8

 work: • Planning
 • Drafting Remedial grammar from learners’
 E.g. • Proofreading writing
 Discuss their family • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting Vocabulary in context

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.
9 and 10

 Mid-year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2
 Task 4 Task 5 Task 6

 44 | P a g e
 Oral: Listening comprehension / Prepared Literature: Contextual questions Mid-year examinations: Comprehension, language,
Speaking / Prepared Reading aloud literature and writing

 GRADE 7 TERM 3
Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for appreciation Intensive reading of text for Longer Transactional: Prepositions.
 comprehension on paragraph
 E.g. Listen to sounds around a level Introduce and discuss the features of Word order
 theme e.g. transport writing a friendly letter / note / email /
 E.g. Read text on specific theme narrative / descriptive paragraph Use of the structure “某人 1+给+
 Formal speaking and presenting and answer comprehension 某人 2+做某事”,e.g. 我给他买火
 questions Write a friendly letter / note / email / 车票。
 Prepared Reading aloud with focus narrative / descriptive paragraph on e.g.
 on fluency, pronunciation and tone And Where I am going today
1 and 2

 Salutation for friendly letter / note /
 e.g. text on theme email
 Example of a friendly letter or Focus on process writing:
 paragraph • Planning Vocabulary in context
 • Drafting
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 45 | P a g e
 Listening for interaction: Reading for comprehension: Longer Transactional: (continue) Possessives

 E.g. Listen to text / questions E.g. Viewing visual text on the Introduce and discuss the features of Prepositions.
 related to visual stimulus (where is theme for comprehension and writing a friendly letter / note / email /
 the dog?) answer questions. narrative / descriptive paragraph Word order

 Informal Speaking and group Write a friendly letter / note / email Use of duplication of Verbs, e.g.我
 work: narrative / descriptive paragraph on e.g. 们找找吧。
 Where I am going today
3 and 4

 E.g. Responding to oral questions Salutation for friendly letter / note /
 related to visual stimulus Focus on process writing: email
 • Planning
 • Drafting Vocabulary in context
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 46 | P a g e
 Listening for comprehension Intensive reading of Visual Creative: Adjectives
 Texts:
 E.g. listen to acoustic impulses Make sentences with new vocabulary Interrogatives
 View picture on chosen theme –
 And e.g. the city And New verbs and nouns

 Listen to a dialogue on a new Write a descriptive paragraph on e.g. a Use of the structure “A 没有 B+
 theme e.g. where I live picture based on theme adj.”,e.g.南非没有中国大。
5 and 6

 Informal Speaking and group Remedial grammar from learners’
 work: Focus on process writing: writing
 • Planning
 E.g. Use vocabulary of new theme, • Drafting Vocabulary in context
 speak about the acoustic impulses • Proofreading
 and practise saying sentences • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.
 Listening for information Reading for comprehension on Creative: New verbs and nouns
 paragraph level
 E.g. Listen to identify different Label a map and write sentences using Numbers
 countries of the world / provinces E.g. Peer reading of descriptive new vocabulary.
 in South Africa paragraphs written in previous Describe a place of interest in the map and Plurals
 cycle (for enjoyment) how one may access it, for example, means
 Informal Speaking of transport, landmarks and tourist Prepositions
7 and 8

 or attraction areas.
 Role play on theme e.g. different Use of the structure “某处 1+离+
 countries of the world / provinces Literary text Characters are preferred, and pinyin could 某处 2+很远/近”,e.g. 南非离中国
 in South Africa be used if needed. 很远。
 E.g. Reading for enjoyment e.g.
 poem / short story / short drama / Remedial grammar from learners’
 short novel writing

 Vocabulary in context

 47 | P a g e
 Listening for appreciation Literary text Creative: Reinforcing all grammar done this
 term
 E.g. Listening to part of / complete E.g. Read story / poems / songs / E.g. Write captions for a picture story
 story / poems / songs / cartoon / cartoon / short drama / short novel based on theme and language covered to Vocabulary in context
 short drama / short novel and respond to comprehension reinforce grammar learned throughout the
 questions term.
9 and 10

 Reading aloud
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 Work on e.g. pronunciation, be used if needed.
 intonation, pace, fluency and body
 language

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3
 Task 7 Task 8 Task 9

Oral: Listening comprehension / Prepared Speaking Writing: Creative (Narrative / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Test 2: Comprehension and
/ Prepared Reading aloud Transactional (Shorter or longer) text) language OR
 Literature: Contextual questions

 48 | P a g e
 GRADE 7 TERM 4
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and
 explicit)
 Listening for comprehension Intensive reading of Visual Creative: Negative
 Texts:
 Listen to a dialogue e.g. on a Practise question and answer sentences on the Adjectives and
 new theme – my body View and read pictures on the selected theme. adverbs
 theme e.g. different body parts
 Informal Speaking Label pictures used. Possessives

 Respond to questions after Longer Transactional: Vocabulary in context
 viewing and reading Visual Write a letter to your friend what you have
1 and 2

 Text learnt e.g. how to take care of my body

 Focus on process writing:
 • Planning
 • Drafting
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could be
 used if needed.

 49 | P a g e
 Listening for specific Reading for comprehension Transactional: Remedial grammar from
 information learners’ writing
 E.g. Reading of learners’ written Write e.g. a prepared speech on “My body”
 E.g. Listening comprehension paragraphs Negative
 on theme selected in previous
 cycle. Or Characters are preferred, and pinyin could be Interrogatives
 used if needed.
 Formal Speaking and E.g. A selected text on the theme Conjunctions
3 and 4

 presenting:
 Adjectives and adverbs
 E.g. Prepared speech written in
 this and previous cycle. Possessives

 Vocabulary in context

 Remedial grammar from
 learners’ writing

 50 | P a g e
 Listening for specific Intensive reading of Visual Creative: Interrogatives
 information Texts:
 E.g. Learners draw own pictures in different Adjectives
 E.g. Learners listen for new Learners view and read text e.g. colours, label them and then
 vocabulary by using a visual a picture of different colours and practise writing sentences which describe the Negatives
 text - Introduce new theme e.g. dialogue on the same theme picture .
 colours Demonstratives
 And
 Informal Speaking Possessives
 E.g. Write a descriptive paragraph to describe a
5 and 6

 Practise saying questions and multicoloured picture. Vocabulary in context
 answers e.g. 那件衣服是什么
 颜色的？ Focus on process writing: Remedial grammar from
 • Planning learners’ writing
 • Drafting
 • Proofreading Use of the nominal “的”
 • Editing and rewriting structure, e.g. 红色的，蓝色的
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could be
 used if needed.
 Listening for appreciation Reading for comprehension Examination preparation. Revise sentence constructions
 and language conventions
 E.g. Listen to a song / poem / E.g. Text selected on theme with Reinforce the process of writing in different text learnt
 descriptive paragraphs written comprehension questions to be types such as dialogues, descriptive / narrative
7 and 8

 by learners in previous cycle answered paragraphs Remedial grammar from
 learners’ writing
 Informal speaking Characters are preferred, and pinyin could be
 used if needed. Vocabulary in context
 E.g. Reinforcement of the
 questions and sentences done
 orally this term
9 and 10

 End of year examinations

 51 | P a g e
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 4
 Task 10

End of year examinations
Paper 1: *Orals
Paper 2: Language in context, Literature and Writing

*Oral: Oral year mark from cumulative speaking, listening and reading. Final mark should include at least one prepared speaking task, one listening task and one prepared
reading aloud.

 52 | P a g e
 3.5.1.2 Grade 8 - TERM 1
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for interaction and Reading for comprehension: Shorter transactional text: Common communicative phrases.
 dialogue: Information
 Teach features of filling in forms. Questions words
 E.g. Listen to dialogue between e.g. read a dialogue between two
 two people people and answer some basic E.g. Fill in a form with information
 comprehension questions. emanating from listening exercise. Express basic feelings.
 Informal speaking and group
 work: Use dictionary to look up new Update personal dictionary by writing in Vocabulary from texts
1 and 2

 words. new nouns and verbs.
 Pupils identify questions and Positive / negative
 answers in the dialogue and then Characters are preferred, and pinyin
 practice them in pairs could be used if needed.
 Punctuation

 Nouns and verbs

 Use of personal dictionary

 53 | P a g e
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listen for appreciation: Literary text 1: Longer transactional text: Common communicative phrases.

 Listen to a rhyme / song / poem E.g. Read rhyme(s) / poem(s) / Revise features of the dialogue / Questions words
 song(s) for comprehension descriptive / narrative paragraph
 Informal Speaking and group and appreciation Express basic feelings.
 work: Write a dialogue / descriptive / narrative
 Answer basic questions on the paragraph with given information e.g. Vocabulary from texts dealt with
 E.g. Memorise rhyme / song and above text/s. Personal details of two characters.
 present it in groups or pairs. Positive / negative
 Use bilingual dictionary to look (could be assessed)
3 and 4

 Pupils work on pronunciation, up new words. Punctuation
 tone, rhythm, etc. Introduce process writing stages:
 • Planning Remedial grammar from learners’
 • Drafting writing / form filling.
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting Use of personal dictionary
 • Presenting

 Update personal dictionary

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin
 could be used if needed.

 54 | P a g e
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for information and Reading for comprehension at Short transactional / Creative text: Introduction of new vocabulary: e.g.
 interaction: a word and sentence level: emotions and feelings.
 E.g. learners complete a dialogue by
 E.g. Learners listen to audio or E.g. Read sentences related to filling in the missing parts. Focus on Punctuation
 teacher describing the feelings of feelings and emotions. using language and new vocabulary
 different people. Pupils listen covered, e.g. like expressing emotions. Positive
 and try and match description Use bilingual dictionary to look
 with a set of pictures indicating up new words. Reinforce the features of a dialogue. Negative
 different feelings (sad, happy,
5 and 6

 busy etc). Update personal dictionary. Remedial grammar from learners’
 writing / dialogue / descriptive /
 (could be assessed) Characters are preferred, and pinyin narrative paragraph.
 could be used if needed.
 Informal Speaking and group
 work:

 Learners use pictures to ask each
 other how someone is feeling.
 Learners respond with new
 vocabulary to practice
 expressing feelings / emotions.

 55 | P a g e
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for appreciation: Intensive reading of Visual Creative text: Punctuation
 Texts:
 Learners listen to a song / poem Teach features of a descriptive or Prepositions
 or rhyme based on a new theme. Introduce features of visual text narrative paragraph.
 New vocabulary is introduced. Question words
 E.g. Picture / cartoon E.g. Learners write a paragraph based on
 Informal speaking and group accompanied by written text. a visual text. Conjunctive
 work:
 Answer comprehension Process writing stages: Positive and negative
 Learners read new words aloud questions on cartoon / picture. • Planning
 and practice with a partner. • Drafting Vocabulary in context
 (could assess) • Proofreading
7 and 8

 Listening for specific • Editing and rewriting
 information: Use bilingual dictionary to look • Presenting
 up new words.
 Learners listen to a passage for Write new words in sentences / match
 specific information e.g. They sentences to visual stimulus / write
 listen for words that show captions / label pictures / do a crossword /
 specific location. fill in personal dictionary.
 Informal speaking and group Characters are preferred, and pinyin
 work: could be used if needed.
 Learners respond to “where” (could be assessed)
 questions based on listening to
 the passage.

 56 | P a g e
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and conventions
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for appreciation / Intensive reading for Transactional: Remedial grammar from learners’
 specific information: comprehension at paragraph completion of written paragraphs and
 level: E.g. Written exercise based on current exercises.
 E.g. Listen to creative theme requiring learners to use
 paragraphs in pairs and whole E.g. learners read each others’ vocabulary and grammar covered during Revise grammar covered as well as
 class. paragraphs / an additional text the term. vocabulary.
 based on the theme chosen.
 Prepared Speaking and Update personal dictionary.
9 and 10

 presenting:
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin
 E.g. learners read own could be used if needed.
 paragraphs aloud.

 (could be assessed)

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1

 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Oral: Listening comprehension / Prepared Writing: Creative (Narrative / Descriptive) Test 1: Comprehension and
Speaking / Prepared Reading aloud paragraph(s) / Transactional (Shorter or longer) text language

 57 | P a g e
 GRADE 8 TERM 2
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for appreciation Literary text: Short Transactional: Punctuation

 E.g. Listen to simple short story / Reading of simple short story / Writing for a specific purpose. Imperative
 folktale folktale.
 E.g. Retelling the story using pictures as Basic Conjunctions
 Informal speaking and group Introduce basic features of short stimulus.
 work: story / folktale. Prepositions
 Process writing stages:
 Learners respond orally to picture • pre-reading • Planning Positives
 story / questions related to the • Drafting
1 and 2

 listening. Learners can also • reading • Proofreading Negatives
 practice reading aloud. • Editing and rewriting
 • post-reading • Presenting Vocabulary in context

 (could be assessed)
 Answer questions on story.
 Update personal dictionary.
 (could be assessed)
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 Extended reading (another short be used if needed.
 story for learners to read
 independently)

 58 | P a g e
 Listening for specific Intensive reading of visual and Short transactional text: Remedial grammar from learners’
 information: written text: writing / retelling
 Learners introduced to features of short
 Listen to new vocabulary and Learners read visual text e.g. a transactional texts. Use of the structure “Subject +
 listen to text for specific timetable. They then answer Time words + 才 + verb, e.g. 我们
 information. E.g. A weekly questions. E.g. Learners can write a diary / list 星期三才上汉语课。
 schedule / diary of somebody – a containing activities planned for the
3 and 4

 school theme (could be assessed) coming week. Punctuation

 Informal speaking and group Characters are preferred, and pinyin could Imperative
 work. be used if needed.
 Question words
 Learners respond orally to (could be assessed)
 questions based on the listening Vocabulary in context
 passage and then questions
 relating to themselves.
 Listening for specific Reading for comprehension on Transactional: Use of the structure “要是（如
 information: sentence and paragraph level: 果）……, 就……”, e.g. 要是下个
 Listening Comprehension E.g. Written exercise based on current 周末不下雨，我就去游泳。
 Use visual stimulus / paragraph as theme requiring learners to use new
 (could be assessed) reading exercise on new theme. vocabulary and grammar covered – the Remedial grammar from learners’
 Answer questions based on school and future tense. writing diary / list
5 and 6

 Formal speaking and paragraph. (integrated grammar and writing).
 presenting: New time related words
 (could be assessed) Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 Prepared speech. Learners talk be used if needed. Question words
 about what they will do next week.
 (could be assessed) Vocabulary in context
 Update personal dictionaries.

 59 | P a g e
 Listening for appreciation / Reading for comprehension: Creative: Use of sentences with double
 specific information / objects, e.g. 她给我一本书。
 interaction: E.g. Read dialogue based on Learners write a descriptive paragraph
 current theme and new grammar based on visual text. E.g. photograph / Punctuation
 E.g. pupils listen to a song concept. Answer comprehension picture.
 introducing new vocabulary / play questions. Vocabulary in context
 game by listening to and carrying Process writing stages:
 out instructions involving location (could be assessed). • Planning
 phrases. • Drafting
 Use of bilingual dictionary to look • Proofreading
7 and 8

 Informal speaking and group up new words. • Editing and rewriting
 work: • Presenting.
 Respond orally to questions Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 related to visual stimulus. Pair be used if needed.
 work and whole class.
 (could be assessed)

 Revision – writing of sentences
 incorporating new vocabulary and
 grammar.
 (integrated grammar and writing).
9 and 10

 Mid-year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2
 Task 4 Task 5 Task 6:

Oral: Listening comprehension / Formal prepared Literature: Contextual questions Mid-year examinations:
speaking / Prepared Reading aloud Comprehension, language, literature and writing

 60 | P a g e
 GRADE 8 TERM 3
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for appreciation: Intensive reading of text for Longer Transactional: Use of modal verbs + verbs, e.g. 你
 comprehension on paragraph 愿意吃中国菜吗？
 Listen to new words and sounds level Discuss features of a dialogue.
 related to a new theme e.g. food. Punctuation
 E.g. Read text on specific theme Learners write a dialogue using new
 Informal speaking in groups: and answer comprehension vocabulary and grammar. Expressing likes and
 questions. dislikes.
 Practice new words and use simple Focus on process writing:
 sentences to describe pictures (could be assessed) • Planning Commonly confused words
1 and 2

 related to new theme. Focus on • Drafting
 pronunciation and intonation. Use bilingual dictionary. • Proofreading Vocabulary in context
 • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 (could be assessed)

 Update personal dictionary.

 61 | P a g e
 Listening for appreciation: Intensive reading for Short transactional text: Remedial grammar from learners’
 comprehension at sentence and writing of dialogue.
 E.g. Listen to dialogues being read paragraph level: Introduce and discuss the features of
 by peers writing a short transactional text for 第一，第二，第三……然后，最
 Reading of specific instructions specific purposes. 后， etc.
 Formal speaking and presenting: related to new theme e.g. How to
 make a particular dish or drink. Write instructions e.g. For making your “把” structure
 E.g. Learners read dialogues aloud. own favourite dish or drink.
 Sequential commands
 (this activity could be assessed) Focus on process writing:
3 and 4

 Punctuation
 • Planning
 • Drafting Commonly confused words
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting Vocabulary in context
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 (could assess)

 62 | P a g e
 Listening for appreciation: Intensive reading of Visual Short transactional text: Remedial grammar from learners’
 Texts: writing for specific purposes.
 Learners listen to peer Label picture of e.g. a cooking scene.
 presentations. E.g. How to make View audio visual text based on 第一，第二，第三……然后，最
 favourite meal. current theme. E.g. Cooking Write a shopping list for ingredients. 后， etc.
 programme on TV.
 Formal speaking and presenting: Focus on process writing: “把” structure
 Answer questions after viewing. • Planning
5 and 6

 Learner presents prepared speech. • Drafting Sequential commands
 E.g. giving instructions to • Proofreading
 complete a specific task. • Editing and rewriting Punctuation
 • Presenting
 (can be assessed) Commonly confused words
 Update personal dictionaries.
 Vocabulary in context
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.
 Listening for information / Reading for comprehension on Transactional: Forms of address
 appreciation: paragraph level
 Fill in information based on listening to Polite requests
 Listen to dialogue. E.g. Customer E.g. Read descriptive paragraph on dialogue. E.g. Items bought by customer
 and shopkeeper. current theme and answer and prices. Prepositions
 questions.
 Informal speaking and group Write sentences / captions for a picture New verbs and nouns
7 and 8

 work. (could assess comprehension) based on theme and language covered.
 Numbers
 Respond to questions related to Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 listening. be used if needed. Measure words, e.g. 斤, 公斤, 升,
 听, etc.

 Modal verbs + verbs

 Vocabulary in context

 63 | P a g e
 Listening for appreciation Literary text Creative: Remedial grammar from learners’
 writing.
 E.g. Listening to part of / complete E.g. Read story / poems / songs / E.g. Write captions for a picture story
 story / poems / songs / short drama short drama / short novel and based on theme and language covered to Reinforcing all grammar done this
 / short novel answer comprehension questions. reinforce grammar learned throughout the term.
 term.
 Informal speaking and group (could be assessed) Vocabulary in context.
 work Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
9 and 0

 be used if needed.
 E.g. Respond orally / make
 predictions about title / pictures. (could be assessed)

 Formal speaking and presenting:

 Prepared reading aloud. E.g. Story
 / poem / song etc.

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3
 Task 7 Task 8 Task 9

Oral: Prepared reading aloud / listening Writing: Creative (Narrative / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Test 2: Comprehension and language OR
comprehension / prepared speaking Transactional (Shorter or longer) text Literature: Contextual questions

 64 | P a g e
 GRADE 8 TERM 4
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and
 explicit)
 Listening for comprehension: Intensive reading of Texts at Short Transactional: Forms of address
 word level:
 Introduce new vocabulary on Practise writing new words into personal Polite requests
 theme through acoustic View and read new words on dictionaries / do a crossword / label pictures /
 impulses. E.g. Sounds of theme. write captions for pictures. Imperatives
 different modes of transport.
 And Characters are preferred, and pinyin could be Question words
 Informal Speaking used if needed.
 Intensive reading of Texts at Conjunctives
 Respond to questions after sentence and paragraph level:
1 and 2

 listening to acoustic impulses Quantity
 e.g. Modes of transport. Read dialogue on the selected
 theme e.g. someone wanting to Adjectives and adverbs
 get from A to B using a
 particular mode of transport. Times and days of the week.

 Answer comprehension Modals
 questions on the dialogue.
 Use of structure “A 离 B+远/
 近”, e.g. 我家离学校很远。

 Vocabulary in context

 65 | P a g e
 Listening for appreciation: Reading for comprehension: Creative Text: Punctuation

 Listening to poem / song / Literary text Learners write a creative text based on visual Prepositions
 story based on theme. stimulus e.g. Town scene.
 Learners can read additional Positive and negative
 Informal speaking and group poems / text on selected theme. Focus on process writing:
 work: • Planning Adjectives and adverbs
3 and 4

 Answer comprehension • Drafting
 Learners learn and sing song or questions on text. • Proofreading Complement of action, e.g. 次,
 perform poem. • Editing and rewriting 趟.
 Look up new vocabulary in • Presenting
 Focus on pronunciation, bilingual dictionary. Vocabulary in context
 rhythm, body language and Characters are preferred, and pinyin could be
 gestures. used if needed.

 Listening for appreciation: Intensive reading of Visual Creative text: Remedial grammar from
 Texts: learners’ creative writing.
 Learners listen to creative Learners write captions for a picture story.
 pieces read by peers. Learners can view visual texts Do exercise on aspects of
 and match sentences to these Focus on process writing: grammar covered.
 Formal speaking and visual texts. • Planning
 presenting: • Drafting Interrogatives
 • Proofreading
5 and 6

 Learner read prepared creative • Editing and rewriting Adjectives
 texts or a poem. • Presenting
 Colours
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could be
 used if needed. Polite requests

 Negatives

 Possessives

 Vocabulary in context

 66 | P a g e
 Listening for information / Reading for comprehension Creative and transactional texts: Revision of language structures
 interaction: and conventions as well as
 Selected text for revision of Revise and reinforce the process of writing vocabulary.
 Revision through discussion of comprehension techniques. different text types such as dialogues,
7 and 8

 topics covered in the year. descriptive / narrative paragraphs and short Remedial grammar from
 Revision of literary texts. transactional texts. learners’ writing.
 Informal speaking
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could be Captions for picture story.
 Learners respond to questions used if needed.
 based on work covered.
9 and 10

 End of year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 4
 Task 10

End of year examinations:
Paper 1: *Orals
Paper 2: Language in Context, Literature and Writing

*Orals: Oral year mark from cumulative speaking, listening and reading. Final mark should include at least one prepared speaking task, one listening task and one prepared
reading aloud task.

 67 | P a g e
 3.5.1.3 Grade 9 TERM 1

 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for interaction and Reading for comprehension: Creative text / Longer transactional Sentence structure “ Subject + verb +
 dialogue: Information text: 着 + noun”, e.g. 她戴着一副眼镜。
 Paragraph / dialogue
 Pair and whole class: e.g. a description about someone Vocabulary from texts dealt with
 Introduce a class-mate using the / a picture of someone e.g. Write a descriptive paragraph /
 information provided: e.g. dialogue
 Nationality
 Name Giving information in a logical order
 Age
1 and 2

 Grade Process writing stages:
 Origin • Planning
 • Drafting
 Formal speaking and • Proofreading
 presenting: • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting
 Prepared reading aloud
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 68 | P a g e
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listen for appreciation Literary text : Creative text:
 Introduce new verbs
 Informal Speaking and group E.g. Read rhyme(s) / poem(s) / Write a narrative paragraph
 work: song(s) for comprehension Remedial grammar from learners’
 and appreciation writing
 E.g. Memorise rhyme / song and Introduce process writing stages:
 present it in groups Discuss text • Planning Vocabulary in context
3 and 4

 • Drafting
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 Listening for information and Reading for comprehension at Short transactional / Creative text: Sentence structure “ Place + verb + 着
 comprehension: a word and sentence level: + noun”, e.g. 墙上挂着一幅画儿。
 E.g. Fill in a form
 Informal Speaking and group E.g. Start a new theme: according to listening exercise Nouns
 work:
 Read a text on “My home” E.g. Write a narrative paragraph of Verbs
 Teach features of learners’ own home
 listening for information Vocabulary in context
5 and 6

 Process writing stages:
 E.g. information to be filled in on • Planning
 a form: • Drafting
 Number of bedrooms • Proofreading
 Garden • Editing and rewriting
 Kitchen • Presenting
 Bathroom
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 69 | P a g e
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for interaction Intensive reading of Visual Short transactional: Progressive aspect with “在……
 and information Texts: （呢）” or “正在……（呢）”, e.g.
 E.g. Teach features of a dialogue / 我爸爸在看书，我妈妈正在做饭
 Speaking for specific purposes Introduce features of visual text prepared speech
 呢。
 / Informal speaking
 E.g. Picture of a home with text Write a dialogue / prepared speech
 Punctuation
 E.g. Picture of a home as used in
 reading: Process writing stages:
7 and 8

 Prepositions
 • Planning
 Asking questions about picture • Drafting Interrogatives
 and responding to the questions • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting Direct speech
 • Presenting
 Remedial grammar from learners’
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could writing
 be used if needed.
 Vocabulary in context
 Listening for appreciation / Reading for comprehension: Creative / Transactional: Verbs, adjectives and nouns - revision
 specific information: integrated with reading and writing
 E.g. Read a paragraph E.g. Sentence writing /
 E.g. Listening comprehension Label pictures Translation of sentences to assess
 View and discuss various visual grammar taught
 Prepared Speaking and texts e.g. a picture, photograph Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 presenting: be used if needed. Explain meaning of verbs, adjectives
9 and 10

 and nouns in use
 E.g. Dialogue or Prepared
 speech Reinforcement of grammar covered in
 first term.

 Remedial grammar from learners’
 writing

 Vocabulary: in context

 70 | P a g e
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1
 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Oral: Listening comprehension / Writing: Creative (Narrative / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Test 1: Comprehension and
Prepared Speaking / Prepared Reading Transactional (Shorter or longer) text language
aloud

 71 | P a g e
 GRADE 9 TERM 2
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for specific Reading for comprehension on Shorter Transactional: Use of structure “从 A 到 B”, e.g. 从
 information sentence level: 学校到电影院怎么走？
 Process writing stages:
 E.g. Listen to instructions / Read examples of instructions or • Planning Punctuation
 directions given directions • Drafting
 • Proofreading Imperative
 Speaking for specific purposes / • Editing and rewriting
 Formal speaking and presenting • Presenting Basic Conjunctions
1 and 2

 (Prepared Reading aloud)
 E.g. Write directions or instructions Logical connectors that signal cause
 E.g. Give instructions or directions (e.g. 因为，所以，那么) and time
 (how to get from A to B) in groups Characters are preferred, and pinyin could (e.g. 然后，接着，再，最后)
 / individual be used if needed.
 Prepositions (revision)
 or
 Negatives
 Prepared Reading aloud -
 examples of instructions or
 Vocabulary in context
 directions

 72 | P a g e
 Listening for specific Reading for comprehension on Short Transactional: Remedial grammar from learners’
 information: word and sentence level: writing
 E.g. Writing for a specific purpose
 E.g. Listening to directions/ Read to identify and discuss the Use of structure “……还是……”,
 instructions for listening use of e.g. imperative, prepositions Process of writing a prepared speech. e.g. 往左拐还是往右拐？
 comprehension / to the prepared introduced
 speeches Process writing stages: Punctuation
 • Planning
 Formal speaking and • Drafting Imperative
 presenting: • Proofreading
3 and 4

 • Editing and rewriting Basic Conjunctions
 Discuss the features of prepared • Presenting
 speech Logical connectors that signal cause
 Prepared speech (for enrichment) (e.g. 因为，所以，那么) and time
 Prepared speech
 (e.g. 然后，接着，再，最后)
 E.g. giving directions / making Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 something (instructions) be used if needed. Prepositions (revision)

 Negatives

 Vocabulary in context
 listening for specific Reading for comprehension on Transactional: Use of structure “verb +了+时量
 information: sentence and paragraph level: +(noun)”, e.g. 下了两个小时雨
 Listening Comprehension E.g. label a weather report / weather
 Read and interpret the features of symbols / pictures Phrase and sentence structures and
 Informal speaking e.g. cartoons, weather map / conventions
 weather report / poem / song Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
5 and 6

 Informal Speaking: E.g. weather be used if needed. New verbs

 Idioms

 Remedial grammar from learners’
 writing

 Vocabulary in context

 73 | P a g e
 Formal speaking and Reading for comprehension: Transactional: Use of structure “A 比 B 更/还
 presenting: +adjective”, e.g. 今天比昨天还冷.
 Peer reading of weather reports / E.g. Write weather report / dialogue
 E.g. dialogues Identify and reinforce the different
 Role play / report on the weather Process writing stages: language structures and conventions.
 • Planning
7 and 8

 Listening for appreciation: • Drafting Remedial grammar from learners’
 • Proofreading writing
 E.g. listen to the weather report / • Editing and rewriting
 role play • Presenting. Vocabulary in context

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.
9 and 10

 Mid-year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2
 Task 4 Task 5 Task 6

Oral: Listening comprehension / Formal prepared Literature: Contextual questions Mid-year examinations: Comprehension, language,
speaking / Prepared Reading aloud literature and writing

 74 | P a g e
 GRADE 9 TERM 3
 Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for appreciation Intensive reading of text for Longer Transactional: Prepositions.
 comprehension on paragraph
 E.g. Listen to sounds around a level Introduce and discuss the features of Modal verb + verb, e.g.你可以摘
 theme e.g. farm writing a friendly letter / narrative / 葡萄,你应该秋天来。
 E.g. Read text on specific theme descriptive paragraph
 Formal speaking and presenting and answer comprehension Possessives
 questions Write a friendly letter / narrative /
 Prepared Reading aloud with focus descriptive paragraph on e.g. my visit to Adjectives and adverbs
 on fluency, pronunciation and tone the farm
1 and 2

 e.g. text on theme Comparisons
 Focus on process writing:
 • Planning Punctuation
 • Drafting
 • Proofreading Salutation for friendly letter
 • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting Vocabulary in context

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 75 | P a g e
 Listening for interaction: Reading for comprehension: Longer Transactional: (continue) Prepositions.

 E.g. Listen to questions related to Reading of literary text for Introduce and discuss the features of Use of the structure “verb + 了 +
 visual stimulus (picture of farm) information and comprehension writing a friendly letter / narrative / 时量 + (名词) + 了”, e.g. 我们来
 descriptive paragraph 了三天了。
 Informal Speaking and group Or
 work: Write a friendly letter / narrative / Possessives
 Example of a friendly letter or descriptive paragraph on e.g. my visit to
 E.g. Responding to oral questions paragraph the farm Adjectives and adverbs
3 and 4

 related to visual stimulus
 Focus on process writing: Comparisons
 • Planning
 • Drafting Punctuation
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting Vocabulary in context
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 76 | P a g e
 Listening for comprehension Intensive reading of Visual Creative: Use of the pattern “是……的”to
 Texts: emphasize time, e.g. 这辆车是去
 E.g. listen to acoustic impulses Label picture of e.g. the garage 年买的。
 View picture on chosen theme –
 And e.g. the garage Or Remedial grammar from learners’
 writing
 Listen to a dialogue on a new Transactional:
 theme e.g. garage or shop Polite requests
 Filling in missing information based on
 Informal Speaking and group listening dialogue Revision of imperative
 work:
 And Interrogatives
 E.g. Use vocabulary of new theme,
5 and 6

 speak about the acoustic impulses Write a descriptive paragraph on e.g. a New verbs and nouns
 and practise saying sentences picture based on theme
 Vocabulary in context
 Focus on process writing:
 • Planning
 • Drafting
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting
 • Presenting

 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed.

 77 | P a g e
 Listening for appreciation Reading for comprehension on Creative: Remedial grammar from learners’
 paragraph level writing
 Listen to role play of learners Write sentences / captions for a picture
 E.g. Peer reading of descriptive based on theme and language covered. Polite requests
 Formal Speaking and presenting paragraphs written in previous
 cycle (for enjoyment) Characters are preferred, and pinyin could Revision of
 role play on theme e.g. the garage be used if needed. imperative
7 and 8

 or
 Interrogatives
 Literary text
 New verbs and nouns
 E.g. Reading for enjoyment e.g.
 poem / short story / short drama / Numbers
 short novel
 Modals

 Vocabulary in context
 Listening for appreciation Literary text Creative: Reinforcing all grammar done this
 term
 E.g. Listening to part of / complete E.g. Read story / poems / songs / E.g. Write captions for a picture story
 story / poems / songs / short drama short drama / short novel and based on theme and language covered to Vocabulary in context
 / short novel respond to comprehension reinforce grammar learned throughout the
 questions term.
 Informal speaking and group
9 and 10

 work Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 E.g. Respond orally / make be used if needed.
 predictions to title / pictures

 And

 Reading aloud

 Work on e.g. pronunciation and
 fluency
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3

 78 | P a g e
 Task 7 Task 8 Task 9

Oral: Prepared reading aloud / listening Writing: Creative (Narrative / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Test 2: Comprehension and language OR
comprehension / prepared speaking Transactional (Shorter or longer) text Literature: Contextual questions

 79 | P a g e
 GRADE 9 TERM 4
Weeks Listening & Speaking Reading & Viewing Writing & Presenting Language structures and
 1 hour 1 hour 1 hour conventions
 1 hour (integrated and explicit)
 Listening for comprehension Intensive reading of Visual Texts: Creative: Use of complement of result with
 adjectives, e.g.准备好了; 吃完
 Listen to a dialogue e.g. on a View and read pictures / a menu on the Practise question and answer sentences on 了。
 new theme – someone orders theme e.g. different food types the selected theme.
 food in a restaurant Negative
 And Label pictures used.
 Informal Speaking Interrogatives
 Read dialogue(s) on the selected theme Transactional:
 Respond to questions after e.g. a restaurant scene or buying food. Write a dialogue on e.g. a restaurant scene Polite requests
 viewing and reading Visual Text
 Answer comprehension questions on the Focus on process writing: Likes and dislikes
 dialogue. • Planning
 • Drafting
1 and 2

 Conjunctions
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting Forms of address
 • Presenting
 Modals
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed. Expressions of

 Quantity

 Adjectives and adverbs

 Possessives

 Vocabulary in context

 80 | P a g e
 Listening for specific Reading for comprehension Transactional: Remedial grammar from learners’
 information writing
 E.g. Reading of learners’ written Write e.g. dialogue for three in a restaurant
 E.g. Listening comprehension on dialogues – waiter and two customers Negative
 theme selected in previous cycle.
 Or Characters are preferred, and pinyin could Interrogatives
 Formal Speaking and be used if needed.
 presenting: E.g. A selected text on the theme Polite requests

 E.g. Dialogues / role play as Likes and dislikes
 written in this and previous cycle.
 Conjunctions
3 and 4

 Forms of address

 Modals

 Expressions of

 Quantity

 Adjectives and adverbs

 Possessives

 Vocabulary in context

 81 | P a g e
 Listening for specific Intensive reading of Visual Texts: Creative: Use of particle “了” in structure
 information “subject + verb + 了 + 数量/动量 +
 Learners view and read text e.g. a picture E.g. Label pictures; (名)” e.g. 他买了一件红色的 T 恤
 E.g. Learners listen for new of different people wearing different types Practise writing descriptive sentences.
 衫。
 vocabulary by using a visual text of clothing. They can e.g. match text to
 Interrogatives
 - Introduce new theme e.g. the pictures. Practise writing questions and answers e.g.
 clothes 她穿了一件什么衣服？那件衣服多少 Adjectives
 钱？
 Informal Speaking
 Colours
 And
 Practise saying questions and
 Polite requests
 answers e.g. 她穿了一件什么衣 E.g. Write a descriptive paragraph to
5 and 6

 服？那件衣服多少钱？ describe what someone is wearing or Spelling
 buying
 Plurals

 Focus on process writing: Present Tense
 • Planning
 • Drafting Negatives
 • Proofreading
 • Editing and rewriting Demonstratives
 • Presenting
 Possessives
 Characters are preferred, and pinyin could
 be used if needed. Vocabulary in context

 Listening for appreciation Reading for comprehension Examination preparation. Revise sentence constructions and
 language conventions learnt
 E.g. Listen to a song / poem / E.g. Text selected on theme with Reinforce the process of writing different
 descriptive paragraphs written by comprehension questions to be answered text types such as dialogues, descriptive / Remedial grammar from learners’
7 and 8

 learners in previous cycle narrative paragraphs writing

 Informal speaking Characters are preferred, and pinyin could Vocabulary in context
 be used if needed.
 E.g. Reinforcement of the
 questions and sentences done
 orally this term
 82 | P a g e
 9 and 10

 End of year examinations

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 4
 Task 10

End of year examinations:
Paper 1: *Orals
Paper 2: Language in Context, Literature and Writing

*Orals: Oral year mark from cumulative speaking, listening and reading. Final mark should include at least one prepared speaking task, one listening task and one prepared
reading aloud.

 83 | P a g e
 SECTION 4

 Assessment in Second Additional Language

4.1 INTRODUCTION

 Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information
 about the performance of learners, using various forms of assessment. It involves four steps: generating
 and collecting evidence of achievement; evaluating this evidence; recording the findings and using this
 information to understand and thereby assist the learner’s development in order to improve the process
 of learning and teaching.

 Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning).
 In both cases regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance the learning experience.

 The assessment of language skills should be integrated. The assessment of a comprehension passage
 should be linked with language use. The assessment of writing should incorporate topics about things
 that happen in real life situations.

4.2 INFORMAL OR DAILY ASSESSMENT

 Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on a learner’s
 achievement that can be used to improve their learning.

 Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations,
 discussions, practical demonstrations, learner-teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, etc.
 Informal assessment may be as simple as stopping during the lesson to observe learners or to discuss
 with learners how learning is progressing. Informal assessment should be used to provide feedback to
 the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but need not be recorded. It should not be seen as
 separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom. Learners or teachers can mark these
 assessment tasks.

 Self-assessment and peer assessment actively involves learners in assessment. This is important as it
 allows learners to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily
 assessment tasks are not formally recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. The results of daily
 assessment tasks are not taken into account for promotion and certification purposes.

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as
 Formal Assessment. Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for
 progression and certification purposes. All Formal Assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the
 purpose of quality assurance and to ensure that appropriate standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a
grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, writing tasks, oral
presentations, demonstrations, performances, etc. While preparations for formal assessment tasks could be done
outside the classroom, the final version should be done under controlled conditions, in the classroom.

Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject.

The following tables provide the formal assessment requirements for Second Additional Languages:

 84 | P a g e
 Table 1: Grades 7 - 9
 Formal Assessment
 During the Year End-of-Year Examination

 40% 60%
 School Based
 End-of-Year Exam Papers
 Assessment (SBA) –
 40% 35% 25%

 Oral Assessment
 Tasks:
• 2 tests Listening
• 6 tasks Written examinations Prepared speaking
 Language in context, writing and literature Prepared reading aloud
• 1 examination (mid-
 (1½ hours) The oral tasks
 year)
 undertaken during the
 course of the year
 constitute the end-of-
 year internal assessment.

The forms of assessment used should be age and developmental level appropriate. The design of these tasks
should cover the content of the subject and include a variety of tasks designed to achieve the objectives of the
subject.

Formal assessments must cater for a range of cognitive levels and abilities of learners as shown below:

Table 2
 Cognitive Levels Activity Percentage of
 Task
Literal Questions that deal with information explicitly stated in the text.
(Level 1) • Name the things/people/places/
 • Identify the persons
 • List the facts/names
 • Describe the place/person/
 • Who was the person ……? Levels 1 and 2:
 • What did the person …..? 80%
 • Why did the person ……?
Reorganisation • When did it happen …..?
 • Where did it happen ……?
(Level 2)
 Questions that require organization of information explicitly stated
 in the text.
 • List two main points/ideas
 • Identify the person/persons ……
 • Explain what happened …….
 • Describe the situation/environment/people …..

 85 | P a g e
 Evaluation These questions deal with judgments concerning value and worth. Level 3: 20%
(Level 3) These include judgments regarding reality, credibility, facts and
 opinions, validity, logic and reasoning, and issues such as the
 desirability and acceptability of decisions and actions in terms of
 moral values.
 • Do you agree with the character’s behavior/statement?
 • Is the character’s attitude/behaviour/action acceptable to you?
 Give a reason for your answer.
 • Criticise the character’s behaviour.
 • Select words that describe the person’s character the best …

4.4 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT

The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school
throughout a term

4.4.1 Overview of requirements

The following tables provide an overview of the Programme of Assessment requirements for each term for
Second Additional Languages:

Table 4.1: Grades 7 - 9
 Programme of Assessment
Grades End of the year
 SBA per Term
 exams
 Term 1: Term 2: Term 3: Term 4:

 7-9 1 Written Test 2 Tasks 1 Written Test 1 Internal end-of-
 + + + year examination
 2 Tasks 1 Mid-year examination 2 Tasks

Grades The structure of Examination papers
 7-9 1 Paper 1 Internal end-of-
 year examination
 Paper 2: Language in context - comprising
 comprehension, language, 2 Papers:
 literature and writing
 Paper 1: Orals

 Paper 2: Language in
 context -
 comprehension,
 language, literature
 and writing

 86 | P a g e
 Grades 7-9
Term Mark (Terms 1 – 3):
 • Each term, add raw marks and totals and convert to % for term mark.
Promotion Mark:
 • Add raw marks and totals for SBA tasks from term 1 to term 3 and convert to 40%,
 • Convert Oral mark (Paper 1) to 25%
 • Convert Paper 2 to 35%

Table 4.2: Grades 7-9
 Programme of Assessment
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 1
 Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Oral: Listening Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 1: Comprehension and
comprehension / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / language
Prepared Speaking / Transactional (Shorter or
Prepared Reading longer) text
aloud
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 2

 Task 4 Task 5 Task 6

Oral: Listening Literature: Contextual Mid-year examinations:
comprehension / questions
Prepared Speaking / Language in context – comprehension,
Prepared Reading language, literature and writing
aloud

 Formal assessment tasks in Term 3
 Task 7 Task 8 Task 9:

Oral: Listening Writing: Creative (Narrative / Test 2: Comprehension and language OR
comprehension / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Literature: Contextual questions
Prepared Speaking / Transactional (Shorter or
Prepared Reading longer) text
aloud
 Formal assessment tasks in Term 4
 Task 10
End of year examinations:
Paper 1: *Orals
Paper 2: Language in context - comprehension, language, literature and writing

*Orals: Learners should do at least one prepared speaking task, one listening task, and one prepared reading
aloud task during the year.

Note:
A test in the Programme of Assessment should not be made up of several smaller tests. Each test should cover a
substantial amount of content and should be set for 30 – 60 minutes each and reflect the different cognitive
levels as set out for the examination paper.

 87 | P a g e
 4.4.2 Examinations: Grades 7 – 9

Format of Examination Paper 1

 PAPER SECTION TIME
 A: Comprehension Grades 7 - 9
 1½ hours
 1Language in context, literature and

 (A range of texts can be used including visual and or graphic texts)
 B: Language
 • Language structures and conventions (words and sentences) should be
 assessed in context using a variety of texts. .
 writing.

 C. Literature
 Any one of the following:
 Poetry / short stories / short novel / short drama (Contextual questions)

 D Writing
 Creative (Narrative / Descriptive) paragraph(s) / Transactional (Shorter or
 longer) text

Content to be covered
Assessment addresses the content as set out in this document. Due to the conceptual progression of the content
across the grades, content and skills from Grades 7 –9 will be assessed in the papers at the end of each year.

Oral Assessment Task: Paper 2

The oral assessment tasks undertaken during the course of the year constitute the end-of-year internal
assessment. The details for the oral tasks, which are administered during the year, are as follows:

 Paper 2 DETAILS
 *Orals will be internally set, internally assessed and internally moderated.
 • Reading
 Prepared reading aloud
 Assess: Understanding of text, conveying meaning, use of voice, correct pronunciation
 • Speaking:
 Orals

 Prepared speaking
 Assess: Planning and organisation of content, tone, speaking, and presentation skills,
 audio-visual aids, correct language
 • Listening
 Listening Comprehension
 Assess: Listen for comprehension and information
*Orals: Oral year mark from cumulative speaking, listening and reading. Final mark should include at least one
prepared speaking task, one listening task and one prepared reading aloud task.

The tasks that are used for formal assessment are recorded and are used to determine whether a learner should
progress or be promoted to the next grade.

 88 | P a g e
 The teacher must plan and submit the annual formal Programme of Assessment to the School Management
Team (SMT) before the start of the school year. This will be used to draw up a school assessment plan in each
grade. The school assessment plan should be provided to learners and parents in the first week of the first term.

4.5 RECORDING AND REPORTING

Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific
assessment task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in the
Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the
learner’s conceptual progression within a grade and her / his readiness to progress or being promoted to the next
grade. Records of learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners
in the teaching and learning process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other
stakeholders. Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’
meetings, school visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters, etc.
Teachers in all grades report in percentages against the subject. The various achievement levels and their
corresponding percentage bands are as shown in the Table below.

 CODES AND PERCENTAGES FOR RECORDING AND REPORTING

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE
 7 Outstanding achievement 80 – 100
 6 Meritorious achievement 70 – 79
 5 Substantial achievement 60 – 69
 4 Adequate achievement 50 – 59
 3 Moderate achievement 40 – 49
 2 Elementary achievement 30 – 39
 1 Not achieved 0 - 29

 Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages
 against the subject on the learners’ report cards.

4.6 MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT

Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation
should be implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate
moderation practices must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

4.6.1 Formal Assessment

 • Grades 7 and 8 tests and examination are internally moderated. The subject advisor/appointed
 provincial/district official must moderate a sample of these tasks during his / her school visits to verify
 the standard of tasks and the internal moderation.
 • Grade 9 tests and examinations must be moderated at district and provincial level. This process will be
 managed by the provincial education department.
 • Subject advisor/appointed provincial/district official must moderate samples of tests and examination
 papers before they are written by learners to verify standards and guide teachers on the setting of these
 tasks.

 89 | P a g e
 4.6.2 Oral Assessment Tasks
 • Grade 7 - 9: Each oral task which is to be used as part of the Programme of Assessment should be
 submitted to the head of department or subject head for moderation before learners attempt the task.
 Teachers should then assess the oral assessment tasks.

 The subject advisor or an assigned provincial moderator must moderate a sample of oral assessment
 tasks during his / her school visits to verify the standard of tasks and the internal moderation.

 A moderator delegated by the department of basic education must moderate a sample of oral
 assessment tasks for grade 9.

4.7 GENERAL
 This document should be read in conjunction with:

 4.7.1 The National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements

 of the National Curriculum Statement, Grades R – 12; and

 4.7.2 The National Protocol for Assessment Grades R – 12.

 90 | P a g e
 GLOSSARY

Active listening – when a person tries to put themselves in the place of the speaker and listens
seriously to what he or she has to say.
acronym -a pronounceable word formed from the first letter or letters in phrase or name, e.g. ANA
(Annual National Assessment), SONA (State of the Nation Address), SASA (South Africa’s Schools Act)

additional language - ( also see home language)- a language learned in addition to one’s home language

additive multilingualism - when a person learns a language (or languages) in addition to his or her home
language. This language does not replace the home language but is learned alongside it. In an additive
multilingual programme, the home language is strengthened and affirmed while any further language
learned is seen as adding value (e.g. all Additional Languages, including the Language of Learning and
Teaching are taught alongside the home language but do not replace it)

aesthetic - 1. sensitive to the beauty of language and thus sensitive to and appreciative of the lasting
 value of texts
 2. an aesthete is a person sensitive to artistic beauty. “Aesthetic” refers to the beauty to be
 found in a work of art. One can discuss the aesthetics of a work, or make aesthetic judgements

alliteration -a pattern of sound that includes the repetition of consonant sounds. The repetition can be
located at the beginning of successive words or inside the words.

ambiguity - double meaning created by the way in which words are used; when used unintentionally,
ambiguity obscures the meaning (e.g. ‘General flies back to front’ or ‘Short children’s stories are in
demand’)

analogy - 1.finding similarities in things that are usually seen as different.
 2. finding similarities in things that are usually seen as different, a way of explaining or illustrating
something, but not a proof. One must be alert to false analogy. There should be accurate correspondence
between the thing that is explained and the details of the analogy

anecdotes - narratives of small incidents or events told for the purpose of information, entertainment,
humour, malice, or to reveal character

animation – the technique of using a series of still pictures to create an illusion of movement or life

anticlimax – when an expectation of some high point of importance or excitement is not fulfilled or the
seriousness of a literary plot is suddenly lost as a result of a comical, digressive or meaningless event

antithesis – the expression of two opposed or different ideas in balanced contrast (e.g. ‘more haste, less
speed’)

antonym – a word that is opposite in meaning to another word in the same language (e.g. ‘happy’ and
‘sad’)

Aphesis – In this case, you have dropped the unstressed vowel at the beginning of the word.
These are often unintentional and casually spoken versions of the words. Perhaps the best
example is ’cause instead of because.

appropriacy – if language is appropriate it is suitable in terms of the context in which it is used (e.g. the
greeting ‘Good morning, Mr Jones’ would be appropriate in a formal work situation whereas ‘Hi, Jo’
would be appropriate between friends)

assessment – a continuous structured process of gathering information on learner competence in many
different ways
 91 | P a g e
 assonance – 1. repetition (mostly) of vowel sounds in two or more words e.g. “ It is June and the world is
all in tune”
 2. Add. The vowel sounds do not have to be precisely the same: assonance could consist of a
series of vowel sounds that create a certain effect

audience – 1. the intended reader(s), listener(s) or viewers of a particular text; in planning a piece of
writing speakers/writers must take into the consideration the purpose and audience when choosing an
appropriate form of writing
 2. Add. In particular, an audience is those attending a live performance of music or drama.

authentic texts – texts which have a practical function and are not literary (e.g. magazine and newspaper
articles, recordings from radio and television, advertisements, product labels, travel brochures,
government forms, examples of real letters)

bias – 1. a tendency to favour one thing, idea, attitude or person over another which makes it difficult to
make a fair assessment
 2. Add. In the game of bowls, the “wood” or bowl has a weight on one side which makes it turn
towards that side

caption – a title or comment attached above or below an article, a picture, a photo and so on

caricature – 1.an exaggerated portrayal (written or visual) of a character which is achieved by mocking
personality traits or appearance
 2. Add. The drawings of cartoonists in newspapers are usually intended to be caricatures and
work by exaggerating or distorting features of appearance with a view to being comic or satirical

cause (see also effect)- that which gives rise to an action or condition

cinematographic techniques – devices used in the construction of a film (e.g. composition, lighting,
type of shot)

clarify- making the meaning of the text clear to the reader

clause – Put in the right place. “The man who was wearing a red shirt ran away.” The main sentence is
“The man ran away.” The words “who was wearing a red shirt” is a subordinate clause. It cannot stand by
itself, although the verb is complete (finite). Subordinate clauses start with a conjunction (when, because)
or a relative pronoun (who, which). The conjunction links the clause to some part of the main sentence.
“The man wearing a red shirt ran away.” In this sentence “wearing a red shirt” is not a clause but a
phrase. The verb is not complete (it is participle).

climax – the most exciting, effective or important part of the story; this important part is not necessarily
at the end

Clipped – Similar to truncation in that you are using a part of the word to form the
abbreviation, but in this case you’re using either the middle or end. Common clipped
abbreviations include phone (telephone), cell (cellular phone) and fridge (refrigerator).

coherence – 1. the underlying logical relationship which links ideas together and gives a passage or
paragraph unity
 2. Add. It may also imply adequate grammar to convey the meaning, or orderly sentence
structure. Chaotic grammar may make a statement incoherent.

cohesion – the linking if sentences or paragraphs by means of logical connectors such as conjunctions,
pronouns or repetition

 92 | P a g e
 colloquialism (see also slang) – language belonging to ordinary or familiar conversation but not used in
formal language

comparative (see also superlative) – degrees of comparison as found in adjectives and adverbs are
positive, comparative or superlative (e.g. ‘long’ (positive), ‘longer’ (comparative), ‘longest’ (superlative)

compare (see also contrast) – to assess the way in which things are similar

conflict – the struggle that arises between characters or between individuals and their fate or
circumstances; conflict in literature can also arise from opposing desires or values in a character’s own
mind

conjunction – a word used to join two clauses, words, phrases or sentences

connotative meaning(see also denotative) – both the positive and negative associations that a word
collects through usage that go beyond the literal (primary) meaning

context – a text is always used and produced in a context; the context includes the broad and immediate
situation including aspects such as social, cultural and political background; the term can also refer to that
which precedes or follows a word or text and is essential to its meaning

context clues Context clues is using words surrounding an unknown word to determine its meaning. This
reading strategy can be taught in conjunction with vocabulary.

contrast (see also compare) – to consider the way in which things differ

conventions – accepted practices or rules in the use of language. Some conventions help to convey
meaning (e.g. the rules of grammar, punctuation, typefaces, capital lettrs); some assist in the presentation
of content (e.g. table of contents, general layout, headings, footnotes, charts, captions, lists, pictures,
index); and others reflect a pattern of language that has become formulaic (e.g. greetings, small talk)

continuous assessment – it involves assessment activities that are undertaken throughout the year

critical language awareness - the analysis of how meaning is constructed with understanding of power
relations in and between languages; it empowers the learner to resist manipulation and to use language
sensitively

debate - in debating, two opposing teams compete with one another. They aim to convince the
adjudicator and the audience that their viewpoint about a given topic is more reasonable and justifiable
than that of the opposing team

denotative meaning (see also connotative meaning) – the literal or primary meaning of a word

derivative – a word derived from another or from a root; usually formed by adding a prefix or suffix (e.g.
‘quickly from ‘quick’)

dialect – a form of a language adapted by a particular community; it is significantly different from other
forms of the same language in terms of words, structures and/or pronunciation

dramatic irony – occurs when the audience/reader/viewer knows more about the situation and its
implications than the characters involved; it heightens the tension, enjoyment and audience participation

dramatic structure – 1. the special literary style in which plays are written
 2. the arrangement of plot, acts, scenes, characters and possibly also features of
language in a play.

drawing conclusions - using written or visual clues to figure out something that is not directly stated in
the reading.

 93 | P a g e
 editing – the process of drafting and redrafting a text, including correcting grammatical usage,
punctuation and spelling errors and checking writing for coherence of ideas and cohesion of structure; in
media, editing involves the construction, selection and lay-out of texts

effect (see also cause) – the result or consequence of an action or condition

emotive language – language which arouses strong feelings

euphemism – a mild or vague expression substituted for a thought or word which is felt to be too harsh
or direct

explicit (as opposed to implicit)- meaning which is clearly or directly stated

external assessment – assessment conducted by a body outside the institution, e.g. ANA, NSC,
provincial paper

evaluate - form opinions, make judgments and develop ideas from reading

figurative (as opposed to literal) - words or phrases used in ac non-literal way to create a desired effect;
literal texts often make concentrated use of figurative language (e.g. simile, personification, metaphor)

fluency – 1. the word comes from the flow of a river and suggests a coherence and cohesion that gives
language use quality of being natural, easy to use and easy to interpret
 2. Add. And with a fair degree of grammatical control (though perhaps not total grammatical
accuracy).

font – the type and size of the letters used when writing, typing or printing (e.g. 12pt (size) Times New
Roman (style of lettering)

foregrounding (as opposed to backgrounding) – used literally, it means the positioning of a subject in
or near the front of the frame; used figuratively, it refers to emphasising or focusing on one point of
aspect more than another

forum - team speaking or forum debate may be used against other schools, or in the classroom by
dividing learners into teams of four, each of whom will speak on a different aspect of the same topic. An
adjudicator decides on the winning team

genre – the types or categories into which texts are grouped, e.g. novel, drama, poetry, business letter,
personal letter.

gesture – a movement of the face or body which communicates meaning (e.g. nodding of head to
indicate agreement)

graphics – products of the visual and technical arts (e.g. drawing, designing)

home language (see also additional language) – the language first acquired by children through
immersion at home; the language in which we think

homonym – a word which has both the same sound and spelling as another but has a different meaning
(e.g. the noun ‘the bear’ and the verb ‘to bear’)

homophone – a word which sounds the same as another but is spelled differently and has a different
meaning (e.g. ‘one’ and ‘won’)

hyperbole – a deliberate exaggeration (e.g. to describe something in such a way that it seems much
bigger than it really is: ‘He gave me a mountainous plate of food.’)

image – a picture or visual representation of something

 94 | P a g e
 imagery – words, phrases and sentences which create images in our minds such as similes, metaphors,
personification

implicit (as opposed to explicit ) – something implied or suggested in the text but not expressed directly

implied (as opposed to direct meaning) – meaning suggested by the text but not directly stated

inclusivity – the principle that education should be accessible to all learners whatever their learning
styles, backgrounds and abilities

infer – to pick up meaning behind what is stated and to deduce all the implications

Initialism – Also called alphabetism, this is a group of letters, each pronounced separately,
used as an abbreviation for a name or expression. Examples include: SA, CD, TV, DBE, UK.

initiate – to start (e.g. to initiate conversation)

innuendo – something unpleasant which is hinted at rather than clearly stated

interview - task of gathering information or a face-to-face discussion between people, directed toward
some specific purpose.

intonation – 1.the pattern of the pitch or the melody of an utterance which marks grammatical structures
such as sentences or clauses
 2. Add. And distinguishes between statements and questions and indicates the speaker’s attitude
or feelings

irony – a statement or situation that has an underlying meaning different from its literal or surface
meaning. Irony is related to tone.

jargon – special terms or expressions used in a trade or profession or by any specific group (e.g.
computer users would refer to a ‘CPU’, ‘RAM’ and so on); when jargon is used to exclude
listeners/readers from an interaction it is potentially hurtful or even harmful

language varieties –.language varieties found when minor adaptations in terms of vocabulary, structure
and/or pronunciation have been made; can vary from one region or country to another

literacies –different kinds of literacy (e.g. critical, visual, graphic, computer, media, socio-cultural

literacy (see also literacies ) – the ability to process and use information for a variety of purposes and
contexts and to write for different purposes; the ability to decode texts, allowing one to make sense of
one’s world. The capacity to read and write

literal (as opposed to figurative) – the plainest, most direct meaning that can be attributed to words

malapropism –the mistaken and muddled use of long words to impress; although these words sound
almost right, they are incorrect enough to bring about humour e.g. conversation and conservation. From a
certain Mrs Malaprop, a comic character in a drama

manipulative language – language which is aimed at obtaining an unfair advantage or gaining influence
over others e.g. advertisements, sales talk, political speeches

metalanguage – the language used to talk about literature and language and grammatical terms; it
includes terminology such as ‘context’, ‘style’, ‘plot’ and ‘dialogue’

metaphor – using one thing to describe another thing which has similar qualities (e.g. ‘Education is the
key to success.’)

 95 | P a g e
 mind map – a representation of a theme or topic in which key words and ideas are organised graphically

mode – a method, a way or manner in which something is presented; a way of communicating (e.g. the
written mode, the spoken or oral mode, the visual mode (which includes graphic forms such as charts));
information can be changed from one mode to another (e.g. converting a graph into a passage)

mood – atmosphere or emotion in written texts; it shows the feeling or the frame of mind of the
characters; also refers to the atmosphere produced by visual, audio or multi-media texts

multi-media – an integrated range of modes that could include written texts, visual material, sound,
video and so on

narrative – a spoken or written account of connected events in order of occurrence, a story

narrative voice / point of view – . the voice of the person telling the story (e.g. a distinction can be made
between first person narrative –‘I’ – who is often a character in the story, or third person narrative in
which the narrator refers to characters as ‘he’, ‘she’ or ‘they’)

onomatopoeia – the use of words to recreate the sounds they describe

oxymoron – a combination of words with contradictory meanings, used deliberately for effect; usually
formed by using an adjective to qualify a noun with an opposite meaning (e.g. an open secret)

panel discussion - groups are formed to discuss a topic, answer questions and respond to tasks
paradox – an apparently self-contradictory statement or one that seems in conflict with logic; lying
behind the superficial contradiction, there is logic or reason

paraphrase – a restatement of an idea or text in one’s own words

paronym – word formed from a foreign word

personification – attributing human characteristics to non-human things

plot – the interrelatedness of the main events in a text; plot involves more than a simple sequence of
events as it suggests a pattern of relationships between events and a web of causation

point of view – the perspective of a character in relation to issues in a novel or play

Portmanteau – The blending of two or more words will give you a portmanteau. The examples
include liger (lion and tiger), brunch (breakfast and lunch), Gautrain, spork (spoon and fork),
skort (shorts and skirt), and brinner (breakfast and dinner).

prejudice – intolerance of or a pre-judgement against an individual, a group, an idea or a cause

projection- the placement and delivery of volume, clarity and distinctness of voice for communicating to
an audience

pun – a play on words which are identical or similar in sound in order to create humour (e.g. ‘Seven days
without water makes one week/weak.’)

redundancy – the use of words, phrases and sentences which can be omitted without any loss of meaning

register – the use of different words, style, grammar, pitch and tone for different contexts or situations
(e.g. official documents are written in a formal register and friendly letters are usually written in an
informal register)

 96 | P a g e
 report - (formal and informal) Giving exact feedback of a situation, e.g. accident

re-reading - Rereading is a reading strategy that gives the reader another chance to make sense out of a
challenging text.

restating - Restating is a reading strategy where the reader will retell, shorten, or summarize the
meaning of a passage or chapter, either orally or in written form.

rhetoric device – device such as pause and repetition, used by a speaker to effectively persuade or
convince. Some devices may be manipulative

rhetorical question – a question asked not to get a reply but for emphasis or dramatic effect (e.g. ‘do you
know how lucky you are?’)

rhyme – words or lines of poetry that end with the same sound including a vowel

rhythm – a regular and repeated pattern of sounds

sarcasm – an ironic expression or tone of voice which is used in order to be unkind or offensive or to
make fun of someone

satire – the use of ridicule, sarcasm and irony to comment critically on society or individual or a
situation

scan – to run one’s eyes over a text in order to find specific information (e.g. scan a telephone directory
for a name and number)

simile – comparing one thing directly with another, a word such as ‘like’ or ‘as’ is used to draw attention
to the comparison

skim – to read a text very quickly to get an overview (e.g. skim the newspaper headlines for the main
news)

slang – informal language often used by a group of people, such as teenagers, who use terms like ‘cool’
and ‘awesome’; the difference between colloquial language and slang is that slang has not yet been
accepted in polite or formal conversation, whereas colloquialisms (e.g. ‘Good show!’) have been

stereotype – a fixed conventional (and often biased) view about what role a particular person is expected
to play

strategy – a certain broad procedure or plan used to tackle a problem

stress (in a word or sentence) – to give force to a particular syllable in a word or a word in a sentence

style – The distinctive and unique manner in which a writer arranges words to achieve particular effects.
Style essentially combines the idea to be expressed with the individuality of the author. These
arrangements include individual word choices as well as such matters as length and structure of
sentences, tone and use of irony.

subplot – subsidiary action which runs parallel with the main plot of a play or a novel

symbol – something which stands for or represents something else

synonym (as opposed to antonym) – a word which has the same meaning or almost the same meaning as
another word in the same language. Synonyms in English tend to have important differences in
connotation

 97 | P a g e
 synthesise – the drawing together of ideas from a variety of sources; a clear summary of these combined
ideas

text – a statement or creation in any written, spoken or visual form of communication

theme – the central idea or ideas in a text; a text may contain several themes and these may not be
explicit or obvious

tone – quality and timbre of the voice that conveys the emotional message of a spoken text. In written
text, it is achieved through words that convey the attitude of the writer. In film, tone can be created
through music or visual effects

transactional writing – functional writing (e.g. letters, minutes of meetings, reports, faxes)

Truncation – This type of abbreviation consists only of the first part of a word. These are most
often used when referring to proper titles such as months of the year or days of the week, e.g.,
Mon., Fri., Apr., Oct.

turn-taking conventions – the customs which govern the flow of conversation between people such as
allowing others to give their opinion, restating to clarify meaning, intervening to redirect focus, asking
for clarification

understatement – express something in restrained terms rather than giving the true or full facts, usually
for emphasis, possibly as a form of evasion, possibly as a form of humour

verbosity – language using more words than are needed

visual texts – visual representations which can be seen and which convey messages (e.g. film images,
photos, computer graphics, cartoons, models, drawing, paintings)

voice – the author’s persona: who the author is; when reading or viewing one gains an impression of the
author and his/her intentions. See narrative voice

wit – the unexpected, quick and humorous combining of contrasting ideas or expressions

word-attack skills - strategies used when reading an unknown word (e.g. breaking it into syllables or
looking at the meaning of the prefixes or suffixes

 98 | P a g e