Subject:  LS Lorianne Sarsfield Gamification and Motivational Design in Blended Learning Environments - Contribute to the Collection in Sage Open 3/1/2026 Dear Dr. Byron, I hope this message finds you well.Based on your publication history, I am writing to invite you to contribute to our Special Collection on Gamification and Motivational Design in Blended Learning Environments, which will be featured in Sa Inbox
Sender: Lorianne Sarsfield<Lorianne.Sarsfield@sagepub.com>
Recipients: To:​  Byron Bunt​
Received: 2026-03-01

 Dear Dr. Byron, I hope this message finds you well. Based on your publication history, I am writing to invite you to contribute to our Special Collection on Gamification and Motivational Design in Blended Learning Environments, which will be featured in Sage Open, IF 2. Submitting your work will provide you with an excellent opportunity to share your research with a wide audience of experts, clinicians, and researchers in the field. Articles featured in Special Collections tend to be cited and read more on average. All manuscripts undergo independent peer-review. For detailed submission guidelines and more information, please visit our submission guidelines. More information on this Special Collection can be found [on the journal website.]here. Alternatively, if you want to get involved with the journal in another way please let me know. We are always considering potential Editorial Board members, Reviewers, or Special Collection Guest Editors. This is a fully Open Access journal so there is an Article Processing Charge (APC) that is charged if your paper is accepted and you opt to publish it. To support your work, we can offer a 20% discount on the APC. Additionally, if your institution holds an open access agreement with Sage, you may be entitled to a different discount. We will honor whichever is higher. To confirm, please visit our OA agreements page here. Researchers from the Research4Life A List receive a full waiver, and researchers from the B List receive a 50% discount. Thank you for considering this opportunity. Please reach out to me directly by reply email to confirm your interest in contributing to this collection or if you have any questions or require further information. We look forward to your submission and highlighting your contribution. Thank you for your time, Lorianne Sarsfield Sage Publishing  © 2025 Microsoft Dynamics. All rights reserved. 2380 Conejo Spectrum Street Thousand Oaks, CA 91320 Unsubscribe