Subject:  DG David Griffiths Some final tweaks to the Prosper report, and uploading materials to Zenodo 1/8/2026 Dear Byron, I hope that you have had a good Christmas and New Year, and that your health and family difficulties have been resolved, or at least ameliorated. I have been working on the Prosper case study report, to get it ready for upload to Zenodo. Inbox
Sender: David Griffiths<david.griffiths@unir.net>
Recipients: To:​  Byron Bunt​
Received: 2026-01-08

Dear Byron, I hope that you have had a good Christmas and New Year, and that your health and family difficulties have been resolved, or at least ameliorated. I have been working on the Prosper case study report, to get it ready for upload to Zenodo. There are two things to address. There are a few details which need attention, which I have flagged with comments in the document https://docs.google.com/document/d/17ev2BKWq7Tc6arXW_oHoQLbK5FOc-k6p/edit There are only 5 comments, mostly to do with updates since we wrote the text. We need to decide which supporting documentation we would like to upload to Zenodo. Clearly the facilitation guide should be there, but there is also the research proposal and ethics materials, as well as other material at https://drive.google.com/drive/u/0/folders/1uPaTOmcHJFc9uMJlwkWKhMMeKKe_HLnc (for example the Miro board of the structure). It would also be good to upload an open data set, if that is something that you and NWU are still happy to do. The two of us could meet up online to decide on these points, or, if you prefer, we could deal with them by email. What are your thoughts? Best wishes, and looking forward to seeing you in Brussels. Dai Professor David (Dai) Griffiths Investigador senior/Senior researcher. Instituto de Investigación UNIR iTED M: +34 687 955912 T: +34 91 567 43 91 david.griffiths@unir.net Universidad Internacional de La Rioja (UNIR) Av. de la Paz, 137 26006, Logroño (La Rioja) C/Almansa, 101 28040 Madrid CONFIDENCIALIDAD: Este mensaje va dirigido de manera exclusiva a su destinatario y puede contener información confidencial, cuya divulgación está prohibida por la ley. Si ha recibido este mensaje por error, le rogamos nos lo comunique de forma inmediata por esta misma vía y proceda a su eliminación, así como la de cualquier documento adjunto al mismo. PROTECCIÓN DE DATOS: El responsable del tratamiento de sus datos, UNIVERSIDAD INTERNACIONAL DE LA RIOJA S.A., le informa que la finalidad es gestionar las comunicaciones realizadas a través del correo electrónico sobre los servicios prestados, información comercial o actividades realizadas. Los datos se conservarán mientras exista un interés general mutuo para ello. Los datos no se cederán a terceros, salvo obligación legal o para alcanzar el fin antes expuesto. Podrá ejercer sus derechos de acceso, rectificación, supresión, oposición, así como otros derechos desarrollados en el RGPD en la dirección Avenida de la Paz, 137 26006, Logroño o enviado email a ppd@unir.net CONFIDENTIALITY: This email is confidential and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they are addressed. If you are not the intended recipient, you are notified that disclosing, copying, distributing or taking any action in reliance on the contents of this information is strictly prohibited. Please notify the senderimmediately, and delete the message and any attachment. DATA PROTECTION: UNIVERSIDAD INTERNACIONAL DE LA RIOJA S.A (UNIR) will storage your personal data in order to manage online communications. In compliance with current regulations, the data will be kept for the period strictly necessary to comply with the aforementioned purpose. UNIR will not disclose any personal data unless required by law. You can exercise your rights to access, rectify, cancel, oppose, or any other regulated by GDPR, at UNIR headquarters, (Avenida de la Paz, 13726006, Logroño, La Rioja, Spain), or by writing to ppd@unir.net