Subject:  CB Chantelle Bosch Ted-SOEP Repository Evaluations and Share2Teach OER Uploads Thu 12:01 PM Dear Colleagues, I hope you are well. This is a friendly reminder regarding the evaluation of the Ted-SOEP OER Repository. We would greatly appreciate your assistance in completing the repository evaluation questionnaire by 15 June. Your feedback is ex Inbox 1
Sender: Chantelle Bosch
Recipients: To:​  Gordon Sekano;​+15 others​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​
Received: 

Dear Colleagues, I hope you are well. This is a friendly reminder regarding the evaluation of the Ted-SOEP OER Repository. We would greatly appreciate your assistance in completing the repository evaluation questionnaire by 15 June. Your feedback is extremely valuable and will contribute to improving the quality, usability, and sustainability of the repository and its resources. To complete the evaluation, please follow these steps: Visit the Ted-SOEP website: https://www.tedsoep.org Register on the website if you have not done so already. Log in and click on the "OER Repository". Browse and explore a few of the published OERs from the various partner institutions. Navigate to the "User Area". Scroll down to "WP3 – OER/OEP Digital Repository Evaluation". Click "Start Questionnaire". Complete and submit the evaluation questionnaire. We know that everyone has a busy schedule, but even a short review of several OERs and completion of the questionnaire will make a significant contribution to the project. We would also like to remind you that the Share2Teach platform is now available for uploading OERs. If you have created OERs as part of the project, please consider uploading them when you have an opportunity. We would also appreciate any feedback on the platform as we continue to refine and improve it. Thank you very much for your support and willingness to assist. Kind regards,  Prof Chantelle Bosch Program Leader: Advanced Diploma in Education School of Mathematics, Science and Technology UNESCO Chair on Multimodal Learning and OER (Executive member) Research Unit Self-Directed Learning (Subarea Leader: Blended Learning) North-West University, Potchefstroom Campus, South Africa Phone: (018) 299 4768 Building B11, Room G18 Chantelle.bosch@nwu.ac.za www.nwu.ac.za www.nwu.ac.za/sdl    Book time to meet with me