Subject:  DG David Griffiths The paper on Prosper 3/24/2026 Hi Byron, I hope that all the difficulties that you have been working through are becoming resolved, and that life is getting easier. It seems all but certain that I will be retiring at the end of April. I have been given a push by the university, bu Inbox
Sender: David Griffiths<david.griffiths@unir.net>
Recipients: To:​  Byron Bunt​
Received: 2026-03-24

Hi Byron, I hope that all the difficulties that you have been working through are becoming resolved, and that life is getting easier. It seems all but certain that I will be retiring at the end of April. I have been given a push by the university, but I think that they are probably doing me a favour! I may still do a little bit on the side, but I will see what develops. In any event it has been a pleasure working with you and Lance, and I think that the Dibl game that you produced is a really excellent piece of work. Did we ever hear anything about the publication of the paper that you led last year? No pressure from me either way, but I'd like to know the status, both for the project final review on 16th April, and to tell my university how things stand. All the best, Dai Professor David (Dai) Griffiths Investigador senior/Senior researcher. Instituto de Investigación UNIR iTED M: +34 687 955912 T: +34 91 567 43 91 david.griffiths@unir.net Universidad Internacional de La Rioja (UNIR) Av. de la Paz, 137 26006, Logroño (La Rioja) C/Almansa, 101 28040 Madrid CONFIDENCIALIDAD: Este mensaje va dirigido de manera exclusiva a su destinatario y puede contener información confidencial, cuya divulgación está prohibida por la ley. Si ha recibido este mensaje por error, le rogamos nos lo comunique de forma inmediata por esta misma vía y proceda a su eliminación, así como la de cualquier documento adjunto al mismo. PROTECCIÓN DE DATOS: El responsable del tratamiento de sus datos, UNIVERSIDAD INTERNACIONAL DE LA RIOJA S.A., le informa que la finalidad es gestionar las comunicaciones realizadas a través del correo electrónico sobre los servicios prestados, información comercial o actividades realizadas. Los datos se conservarán mientras exista un interés general mutuo para ello. Los datos no se cederán a terceros, salvo obligación legal o para alcanzar el fin antes expuesto. Podrá ejercer sus derechos de acceso, rectificación, supresión, oposición, así como otros derechos desarrollados en el RGPD en la dirección Avenida de la Paz, 137 26006, Logroño o enviado email a ppd@unir.net CONFIDENTIALITY: This email is confidential and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they are addressed. If you are not the intended recipient, you are notified that disclosing, copying, distributing or taking any action in reliance on the contents of this information is strictly prohibited. Please notify the senderimmediately, and delete the message and any attachment. DATA PROTECTION: UNIVERSIDAD INTERNACIONAL DE LA RIOJA S.A (UNIR) will storage your personal data in order to manage online communications. In compliance with current regulations, the data will be kept for the period strictly necessary to comply with the aforementioned purpose. UNIR will not disclose any personal data unless required by law. You can exercise your rights to access, rectify, cancel, oppose, or any other regulated by GDPR, at UNIR headquarters, (Avenida de la Paz, 13726006, Logroño, La Rioja, Spain), or by writing to ppd@unir.net