Subject: N NWU NWU University Management Committee's position on administration fee Tue 3:08 PM 2 June 2026 University Management Committee's position on administration fee Dear NWU community The NWU Council newsletter of March 2026 refers. The applications to study at the NWU have increased drastically over the past three years resulting Inbox
Sender: NWU
Recipients: To:​  Marelize Santana​
Received: 

  2 June 2026 University Management Committee's position on administration fee Dear NWU community The NWU Council newsletter of March 2026 refers. The applications to study at the NWU have increased drastically over the past three years resulting in the need to employ additional staff to administer the applications and follow up on applicants. We acknowledge and appreciate that prospective students apply to study for various NWU programmes, and we continue to facilitate access and success for students. However, an increasing number of accepted applicants delay their confirmation of offers and often never accept the offers. Consequently, the NWU does not accept other qualifying applicants due to capacity or availability of spaces in various programmes across the faculties. This implies that some applicants submit applications to study at the NWU without the intention to do so and as a result frustrating those who really want to study at the NWU. The applications and admissions team as well as the recruitment staff are inundated with queries and concerns from students whose applications have been unsuccessful due to capacity. These staff members suffer burnout and mental health challenges due to unnecessary workload. We also employ additional staff during the applications and admission period to address the high volumes of prospective students' queries and complaints. The unconfirmed offers and delayed registration result in the late commencement of the academic year. This has a negative impact on lecturers and students especially those in programmes that involves practical work. These include Nursing, Pharmacy, Agriculture, and Animal Health. Therefore, the NWU Council, at its ordinary meeting of 12 March 2026, approved: the reinstatement of administration fee of R150.00 to ensure a commitment by prospective students; continuation of the R600.00 fee for non-South African prospective students; and use of the administration fees to assist deserving students with critical issues including registration, meal-a-day programme, and outstanding debt. These must be handled on merit or case by case basis. The R150.00 administration fee will be allocated to the students' account upon registration, which effectively means that the amount is credited back to the students. The University Management Committee affirms the implementation of the Council resolution and remains satisfied that the measure serves the best interests of both prospective students and the university. Yours sincerely Prof. Mzubanzi Bismark Tyobeka Principal and Vice-Chancellor