SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE

 National Curriculum Statement (NCS)

 Curriculum Assessment
 Policy Statement
| HOME LANGUAGE

 Intermediate Phase
 Grades 4 - 6
 SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
 HOME LANGUAGE

 INTERMEDIATE PHASE
 Grades 4-6

 National Curriculum Statement (NCS)
 Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS)

CAPS
 Department of Basic Education

222 Struben Street

Private Bag X895

Pretoria 0001

South Africa

Tel: +27 12 357 3000

Fax: +27 12 323-0601

120 Plein Street

Private Bag X9023

Cape Town 8000

South Africa

Tel: +27 21 465-1701

Fax: +27 21 461-8110

Website: http://www.education.gov.za

© 2014 Department of Basic Education

ISBN: 978-1-4315-1952-1
 FOREWORD BY THE MINISTER
 Our national curriculum is the culmination of our efforts over a period of seventeen
 years to transform the curriculum bequeathed to us by apartheid. From the
 start of democracy we have built our curriculum on the values that inspired our
 Constitution (Act 108 of 1996). The Preamble to the Constitution states that the
 aims of the Constitution are to:

 • heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic
 values, social justice and fundamental human rights;

 • improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person;

 • lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government
 is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by
 law; and

• build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of
 nations.

Education and the curriculum have an important role to play in realising these aims.

In 1997 we introduced outcomes-based education to overcome the curricular divisions of the past, but the experience
of implementation prompted a review in 2000. This led to the first curriculum revision: the Revised National Curriculum
Statement Grades R-9 and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (2002).

Ongoing implementation challenges resulted in another review in 2009 and we revised the Revised National
Curriculum Statement (2002) and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 to produce this document.

From 2010, we undertook the development of Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS) for the South
African Sign Language (SASL) Grades R-12 which were completed and approved as policy in July 2014. For a long
time, learners who are Deaf were persistently marginalised as they had been deprived of a home language, resulting
in their education not being one of quality. This has impacted the extent of their retention within the system and their
opportunities of studying further up to and including higher education institutions.

This ground-breaking work has however, ensured that the Department complies with the provision of the South
African Schools Act (84 of 1996) which recognises the SASL as a language of learning and teaching (LOLT). The
CAPS for SASL therefore begins a new era in the educational experiences of Deaf learners in the system and is part
of the Department’s commitment to improving the quality of education for all.

MRS AM MOTSHEKGA, MP
MINISTER
 CONTENTS
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT 2

1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

1.2 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

1.3 General aims of the South African curriculum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

1.4 Time allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 1.4.1 Foundation Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

 1.4.3 Senior Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

 1.4.4 Grades 10-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

SECTION 2: INTRODUCING THE HOME LANGUAGE IN THE INTERMEDIATE PHASE . . . . . . 8

2.1 Languages in the National Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

 2.1.1 Language levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

2.2 Introducing South African Sign Language (SASL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

2.3 The language skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

2.4 Language teaching approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

2.5 Sign bilingualism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

2.6 Time allocation of the Home Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2.7 Learning and Teaching Support Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

SECTION 3: CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR SASL SKILLS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

3.1 Observing and Signing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

3.2 Visual Reading and Viewing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

3.3 Recording . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

3.4 Language structures and conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

3.5 Teaching plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

 Grade 4: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

 Grade 5: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

 Grade 6: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
 SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT IN SASL HOME LANGUAGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

4.2 Informal or daily assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

4.3 Formal assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41

 4.3.1 Formal assessment requirements for SASL Home Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

 4.3.2 The form of tasks per term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

4.4 Programme of Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

4.5 Recording and reporting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

4.6 Moderation of assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

4.7 General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55

GLOSSARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
 SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND
 ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
1.1 BACKGROUND

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the
schooling sector.

To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming into
effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was developed for
each subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines
in Grades R-12.

1.2 OVERVIEW

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for learning
 and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12 (January 2012).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) replaces the two current national curricula
 statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of 31 May 2002,
 and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6 October 2003 and
 No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii) comprise the following policy
 documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January
 2012) during the period 2012-2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment
 Guidelines for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the General
 Education and Training Band, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in Government Gazette No.
 29626 of 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette No.27819 of 20 July 2005;

 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special
 needs, published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy
 document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 2
 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol
 for Assessment (Grades R-12), promulgated in Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette
 No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.

 (vi) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of
 the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment
 Policy as contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South African
 Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to determine
 minimum outcomes and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the assessment of
 learner achievement to be applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 GENERAL AIMS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN CURRICULUM

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values worth
 learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply knowledge
 and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes knowledge in
 local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 serves the purposes of:

 • equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability
 or intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment, and meaningful
 participation in society as citizens of a free country;

 • providing access to higher education;

 • facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and

 • providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is based on the following principles:

 • Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that
 equal educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;

 • Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than rote
 and uncritical learning of given truths;

 • High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at
 each grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;

 • Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

 • Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices of social
 and environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South
 Africa. The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is sensitive to issues of diversity such as
 poverty, inequality, race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;

 • Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country
 as important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

 3 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and depth
 to those of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

 • identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;

 • work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

 • organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;

 • collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

 • communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;

 • use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the environment
 and the health of others; and

 • demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem solving
 contexts do not exist in isolation.

 (e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This can
 only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to learning,
 and how to plan for diversity.

 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant support
 structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based Support Teams, Institutional-Level
 Support Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers in the classroom,
 teachers should use various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those included in the Department
 of Basic Education’s Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 4
 1.4 TIME ALLOCATION

1.4.1 Foundation Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 GRADE R GRADES 1-2 GRADE 3
 SUBJECT
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)
 Home Language 10 8/7 8/7
 South African Sign Language 5,5 6
 First Additional Language 2/3 3/4
 4,5 5
 Mathematics 7 7 7
 Life Skills 6 6 7
 • Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)
 • Creative Arts (2) (2) (2)
 • Physical Education (2) (2) (2)
 • Personal and Social Well-being (1) (1) (1)
 TOTAL 23 23 25

(b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8 hours and a
 minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and a maximum of 3 hours for
 Additional Language in Grades 1-2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated
 for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

For Deaf learners who select SASL as their Home Language the time allocation is as follows:

 Home Language First Additional
 (Hours) Language
 (Hours)
 Grade R 10 10
 Grade 1 5,5 4,5 10
 Grade 2 5,5 4,5 10
 Grade 3 6 5 11

This adjustment will enable Deaf learners to develop competency in handwriting which is not in the FAL curriculum
and will also not be covered in the SASL Home Language curriculum as SASL does not have a written form.

(d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R – 2 and 2 hours as indicated by the hours
 in brackets for Grade 3.

 5 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Mathematics 6
 Natural Sciences and Technology 3,5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4
 • Creative Arts (1,5)
 • Physical Education (1)
 • Personal and Social Well-being (1,5)

 TOTAL 27,5

1.4.3 Senior Phase
(a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 5
 First Additional Language 4
 Mathematics 4,5
 Natural Sciences 3
 Social Sciences 3
 Technology 2
 Economic Management Sciences 2
 Life Orientation 2
 Creative Arts 2
 TOTAL 27,5

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 6
 1.4.4 Grades 10-12
(a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)

 Home Language 4,5
 First Additional Language 4,5
 Mathematics 4,5
 Life Orientation 2
 A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group B 12 (3x4h)
 Annexure B, Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National
 policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements
 of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, subject
 to the provisos stipulated in paragraph 28 of the said policy
 document.

 TOTAL 27,5

The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified above, and
may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish to offer
additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

 7 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SECTION 2: INTRODUCING SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
 HOME LANGUAGE
2.1 LANGUAGES IN THE NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT

Language is a tool for thought and communication. It is also a cultural and aesthetic means commonly shared among
a people to make better sense of the world they live in. Learning to use language effectively enables learners to
acquire knowledge, to express their identity, feelings and ideas, to interact with others, and to manage their world. It
also provides learners with a rich, powerful and deeply rooted set of images and ideas that can be used to make their
world other than it is; better and clearer than it is. It is through language that cultural diversity and social relations
are expressed and constructed, and it is through language that such constructions can be altered, broadened and
refined.

2.1.1 Language levels

Language learning in the Intermediate Phase includes all the official languages in South Africa, namely, Afrikaans,
English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa, isiZulu, Sepedi (Sesotho sa Leboa), Sesotho, Setswana, Siswati, Tshivenda, Xitsonga
– as well as Non-official Languages, such as South African Sign Language (SASL). These languages can be offered
at different language levels. SASL is offered as a subject at Home Language level. This is in anticipation of the
officialisation of SASL at which time it can be offered as a language.

Home Language is the language first acquired by learners. However, many South African schools do not offer
the home languages of some or all of the enrolled learners but rather have one or two languages offered at Home
Language level. As a result, the labels Home Language and First Additional Language refer to the proficiency levels
at which the language is offered and not the native (Home) or acquired (as in the additional languages) language.
For the purposes of this policy, any reference to Home Language should be understood to refer to the level of the
language and not to whether the language is used at home or not. SASL is offered as a Home Language, as it is the
language in which deaf learners are most naturally proficient.

The Home Language (HL) level provides for language proficiency that reflects the basic interpersonal communication
skills required in social situations and the cognitive academic skills essential for learning across the curriculum.
Emphasis is placed on the teaching of Observing, Signing, Visual Reading and Recording skills at this language
level. This level also provides learners with a literary, aesthetic and imaginative ability to recreate, imagine, and
empower their understandings of the world they live in. However, the emphasis and the weighting for Observing and
Signing from Grade 7 onwards are lower than those of the Visual Reading and Recording skills.

The First Additional Language (FAL) refers to a language which is not a mother tongue but which is used for
certain communicative functions in a society, that is, medium of learning and teaching in education. The curriculum
provides strong support for those learners who will use their first additional language as a language of learning
and teaching. By the end of Grade 9, these learners should be able to use their home language and first additional
language effectively and with confidence for a variety of purposes, including learning.

For Deaf learners the medium of learning and teaching is SASL. Since SASL does not have a written form the FAL
serves as the language of literacy. Therefore both languages need to be used alongside each other in a bilingual-
bicultural approach to teaching and learning. All face-to-face teaching and learning takes place through the medium
of SASL while written text is in the FAL (such as English or any other spoken language).

In South Africa, many children start using their additional language, English, as the Language of Learning and
Teaching (LoLT) in Grade 4. This means that they must reach a high level of competence in English by the end of
Grade 3, and they need to be able to read and write well in English. For deaf learners the language of learning and
teaching will remain SASL through to Grade 12 alongside a written language which is the language of literacy and
provides access to all written text. For this reason Deaf learners, too, need to be able to read and write well in English.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 8
 The First Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge of the language
when they arrive at school. The focus in the first few years of school is on developing learners’ ability to understand
and speak the language – basic interpersonal communication skills. In Grades 2 and 3 learners start to build literacy
on this oral foundation. They also apply the literacy skills they have already learned in their Home Language. However
for the majority of Deaf learners the FAL can only be accessed in its written form and is their language of literacy.

In the Intermediate and Senior Phases, Deaf learners continue to strengthen their reading and writing skills in the FAL.
At this stage the majority of Deaf children are learning b o t h through the medium of SASL and through their First
Additional Language, English, and should be getting more exposure to written English. Greater emphasis is therefore
placed on using SASL and the First Additional Language for the purposes of thinking and reasoning. This enables
learners to develop their cognitive academic skills, which they need to study subjects like Science. They also engage
more with signed and written literary texts and begin to develop aesthetic and imaginative ability.

By the time learners enter Senior Phase, they should be reasonably proficient in their First Additional Language with
regard to both interpersonal and cognitive academic skills. However, the reality is that many deaf learners are still
not adequately competent in the FAL at this stage. The challenge in the Intermediate Phase, therefore, is to provide
support for these learners at the same time as providing a curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards
required in further grades. These standards must be such that learners can use the FAL at a high level of proficiency
to prepare them for further or higher education or the world of work.

2.2 INTRODUCING SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE (SASL)

The Minister of Education appointed a ministerial committee, the Curriculum Management Team (CMT), to oversee
the development and implementation of South African Sign Language (SASL) as a subject to be taught in schools.
The Department of Basic Education (DBE) and the CMT appointed a writing team to develop CAPS for SASL. It was
decided to develop SASL as a Home Language (rather than a First Additional Language) to parallel the process of
attaining official status for SASL in South Africa. The decision by the SASL CMT was to make the CAPS of SASL as
close as possible to the other Home Languages in terms of structure, content and sequence.

“As long as we have Deaf people on earth, we will have sign language” (George W. Veditz, 1913).

South African Sign Language (SASL) is a visual-spatial language used by the Deaf community of South Africa. SASL
is a natural language on par with spoken languages that allows users the opportunity to learn and communicate and
to express thoughts, feelings and abstract ideas.

Signed languages use a different modality to spoken languages with meaning being made by non-verbal forms
of communication including movement of the hands, upper body and face. Signs in SASL are made up of five
parameters: hand-shape, location, movement, palm orientation and the non-manual features such as specific facial
expressions that carry important grammatical information. SASL has its own distinct linguistic structure that includes
syntax, morphology, phonology and language conventions. It is not based on any written or spoken language.
Fingerspelling is not signed language, but is used by signers to represent the written form when needed (e.g. proper
nouns, acronyms and technical jargon).

“Sign Language is a real language, equivalent to any other language. Deaf persons can sign about any topic,
concrete or abstract as economically and as effectively, as rapidly and as grammatical as hearing people can. Sign
language is influenced by equivalent historical social and psychological factors as spoken language – there are rules
for attention-getting, turn-taking, story-telling; there are jokes, puns, and taboo signs; there are generational effects
observed in Sign Language and metaphors and ‘slips-of-the-hand’” (Penn, 1993: 12).

 9 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Historically, SASL has emerged with regional variations that mirror the country’s oppressive past which segregated
the education of deaf learners. Research has shown that despite these regional and historical differences, there is a
cohesive and commonly used South African Sign Language that unifies Deaf people across the country. All local/
regional language variations (dialects) of SASL are acceptable as part of the richness of the language. SASL is not
yet accepted as an official language of South Africa although the South African School’s Act (November, 1996) states
that, “A recognised Sign Language has the status of an official language for purposes of learning at a public school”
(Chapter 2, 6.4). Civil society organizations continue to lobby for the recognition of language rights of deaf learners.

Signed language is acquired by Deaf children who are raised in Deaf families in the same way hearing children
acquire spoken language from their hearing parents. The overwhelming majority of deaf children are born to hearing
parents and acquire sign language from their peers and deaf teachers in schools for the Deaf. It is important to
establish an age appropriate SASL language base for all learners from which they can access the curriculum and
develop literacy skills.

In developing this curriculum several assumptions were made including that the CAPS for SASL would match
as closely as possible other Home Languages in terms of structure, content and sequence; that teachers of the
curriculum would be skilled in SASL and appropriate teaching methodologies and that appropriate SASL learning and
teaching support material (LTSM) would to be identified and developed.

It is acknowledged that there is as yet insufficient research on SASL. This means that there has been borrowing
from the research done with other signed languages around the world and addendums to the SASL curriculum will
be included based on on-going research here in South Africa and internationally. Teachers of SASL are encouraged
to use their classrooms as a research resource and all language variations (dialects) are recognised as part of the
richness of the language.

Notes on terminology:

Deaf (with a capital D) is used to denote a distinct cultural and linguistic group of Deaf people who use South African
Sign Language as their language of choice. The Deaf Community has a distinct identity and their experience of the
world is particularly shaped by the fact that their communication is expressed by their bodies and perceived visually.
This group may include hearing children of Deaf parents and other hearing people who are users of SASL and
immerse themselves in the Deaf Community e.g. SASL interpreters.

However deaf (with a lower case d) is an adjective referring to hearing loss from an audiological point of view. Many
deaf people use spoken language to communicate. This group includes people who have lost their hearing through
e.g. age, illness and trauma.

Some verbs in common usage have a connotation of being associated only with spoken languages. These verbs
appear in the curriculum documents in inverted commas and must be used and understood in a signed context.
Examples: “listen to”, “tell”, “listening”,” say”, “a speech”, “something to say”, “read”, “voice”.

Throughout the SASL CAPS the term ‘text’ used to denote a body of work should be understood as signed texts.
These texts e.g. stories, poems, reports are presented in live SASL or may be recorded in SASL. These are NOT
written texts.

Where it is necessary for clarity, the capitalised first letter of the word is used to denote the skill or outcome and the
one in lower case is the action or the verb i.e. Signing (the skill) versus signing (the action).

Where SASL GLOSS (the signs represented in English written form) is used, it is presented in upper case as per
convention.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 10
 2.3 THE LANGUAGE SKILLS

The skills outlined in the CAPS document were used and adapted for SASL.

The skills in the SASL curriculum are:

 CAPS English Home Language CAPS SASL Home Language
 Listening and speaking Observing & Signing
 Phonological awareness (Foundation Phase only) Phonological Awareness
 Reading and viewing Visual Reading and Viewing
 Writing & presenting Recording
 Language structure and use (not for Foundation Language Structure and Use
 Phase)

 CAPS SASL Home Language Description
 Observing & Signing This skill is done with live (face-to-face) signing of a
 variety of signed texts
 Phonological Awareness (working with parameters) Distinction between spoken and Sign Language
 phonology – phonemes (smallest building blocks/units
 of a language) sounds vs. parameters.
 Visual Reading and Viewing This is done with recorded SASL material
 Recording Signed texts are recorded and presented by learners
 Language Structure and Use From Intermediate Phase to FET. In the Foundation
 Phase this skill is integrated in the other skills and not
 taught separately

Observing and Signing

For SASL all Observing and Signing activities are done with live (face-to-face) signing (as opposed to recorded
texts).

Observing and Signing are central to learning in all subjects. Through effective observing and signing learners
collect and synthesise information, construct knowledge, solve problems, and express ideas and opinions. Critical
observation skills enable learners to recognise values and attitudes embedded in texts and to challenge biased and
manipulative language.

In the Intermediate Phase, Home Language learners will use Observing and Signing skills to interact and negotiate
meaning. They will build on skills developed in the Foundation Phase to carry on more sustained conversations,
discussions and short signed presentations. In this phase, learners’ Signing still needs to be strengthened. (i.e.
modelled and supported, for example, with signed vocabulary and sentence frames). The teacher needs to make
sure that all the children get opportunities to practice their Signing skills. Because learners will progress at a
different pace, the teacher needs to tailor signing opportunities (e.g. the questions she asks) to the level of the
individual child. As the learners move through the grades, the teacher should expect learners to sign more and their
signed utterances should become longer and more complex.

Learning will build on the text types introduced in the Foundation Phase (e.g. story, personal recounts, and instructions)
and learners will be introduced to new text types (e.g. factual recounts, different story genres, reports, short
presentations). Teaching time should include daily practice of Observing and Signing activities spread out through
the week.

 11 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Visual Reading and Viewing

For SASL all Visual Reading and Viewing activities are done with recorded SASL material (as opposed to live texts).

Well-developed Visual Reading and Viewing skills are central to successful learning across the curriculum.
Learners develop proficiency in Visual Reading and Viewing a wide range of literary and non-literary signed texts,
including visual texts. Learners recognise how genre and register reflect the purpose, audience and context of texts.
Through classroom and independent “reading”, learners become critical and creative thinkers.

In the Intermediate Phase, you will build on the foundation set in Grades R to 3. If necessary, use Shared Reading
at the beginning of Grade 4 to guide learners into this phase. You can use this method some of the time and alternate
with storytelling.

Use guided Shared Reading and independent/paired reading methods and gradually get learners to do more and
more independent “reading”. The independent Visual Reading and Viewing stipulated in the teaching plans must be
accommodated within the time allocated for Visual Reading and Viewing. Encourage your learners to do independent
“reading” in any spare time that they have. You will also set a variety of comprehension activities to ensure that
learners understand what they “read”/viewed.

The Visual Reading process

The reading process consists of “ pre-reading”, “ during reading” and “ post-reading” stages. The activities the
learner will be engaged in can be summarised as follows:

“Pre-reading”:
• Activating prior knowledge
• Looking at the source, author/signer, and presentation/publication date
• Making predictions

“During reading”:
• Pause occasionally to check your comprehension and to let the ideas sink in
• Compare the content to your predictions
• Use the context to work out the meaning of unknown signs as much as is possible
• Visualise what you are reading”
• Keep going even if you don’t understand a part here and there.
• View a section again if you do not understand at all. View confusing sections and sign along at a slower pace.
• Ask someone to help you understand a difficult section
• Reflect on what you “read” / viewed

“Post-reading”:
• If you will need to recall specific information, make a graphic organiser or outline of key ideas and a few
 supporting details (not for assessment)
• Draw conclusions
• Make summary to help you clarify and recall main ideas.
• Think about and formulate new questions you have on the topic
• Ask yourself if you accomplished your purpose?
• Understanding – confirm your understanding of the text
• Evaluate – bias, accuracy, quality of the text
• Extend your thinking – use ideas you saw in text

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 12
 Recording

Recording is an instrument of communication that allows learners to construct and communicate thoughts and
ideas coherently. Frequent recording practice across a variety of contexts, tasks and subjects enables learners to
communicate functionally and creatively. The aim of this skill is to produce competent, versatile authors/signers who
will be able to use their skills to develop and present appropriate recorded, visual and multi-media texts for a variety
of purposes.

Recording is important because it forces learners to think about appropriate language use and conventions. This
encourages learners to process the language, speeds up language acquisition and increases accuracy. Learners
will learn to record a range of creative and informational texts initially with support and gradually learning to
record particular text types independently. They will also employ the recording process to produce well organised,
grammatically correct recorded texts.

Process approach to recording

Recording and designing texts is a process which consists of the following stages:

• Pre-recording/planning

• Drafting (Recording)

• Revising

• Editing

• Final recording

• Publishing/presenting

Learners need an opportunity to put this process into practice and they should:

• decide on the purpose and audience of a text to be recorded and/or designed;
• brainstorm ideas using, for example, mind maps, flow charts or lists;
• consult relevant sources, select relevant information and organise ideas;
• produce a first draft which takes into account purpose, audience, topic and text structure;
• “ read” drafts critically and get feedback from others (classmates or the teacher);
• edit the draft and re-record;
• produce edited final version; and
• publish final version

SASL Language Structure and Use

Although the various levels of linguistics (phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics and discourse) are in a sense
artificial and divided for teaching purposes, these levels interface with one another and are integrated.

A good knowledge of vocabulary and grammar provides the foundation for skills development (Observing and
Signing, Visual Reading and Viewing and Recording) in the Home Language. Intermediate Phase learners will build
on the foundation that was laid in Grades R – 3.

Learners will learn how Language Structures and Conventions are used, and will develop a shared language for
discussing language (a ‘meta-language’), so that they can evaluate their own and other texts critically in terms of
meaning, effectiveness and accuracy. They will also be able to use this knowledge to experiment with language to
build meaning from sign and sentence levels to whole texts, and to see how a text and its context are related. Through
interacting with a variety of texts, learners extend their use of vocabulary and correctly apply their understanding of
Language Structures and Conventions.

 13 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 It is expected that Language Structures and Conventions should be taught in context as other language skills are
taught and developed. The teaching plans contain a list of Language Structures and Conventions (items) that should
be covered in each grade. When selecting texts for each three-week cycle, make sure that they contain some of the
language items you want to cover. Create activities related to these texts that will enable learners to use these items, in
context. Similarly the texts learners will record will include some of the language items. Give your learners guidance
on appropriate and correct usage of these items. Select some of the items your learners have difficulty with and give
them formal practice. In the Intermediate Phase, thirty (30) minutes per week is set aside for formal instruction and
practice in language structure and conventions.

2.4 LANGUAGE TEACHING APPROACHES

The approaches to teaching language are text-based, communicative and process orientated. The text-based
approach and the communicative approach are both dependent on the continuous use and production of texts.

A text-based approach explores how texts work. The purpose of a text-based approach is to enable learners to
become competent, confident and critical “readers”, authors, viewers and designers of texts. It involves observing,
“reading”, viewing and analysing texts to understand how they are produced and what their effects are. Through this
critical interaction, learners develop the ability to evaluate texts. The text-based approach also involves producing
different kinds of texts for particular purposes and audiences. This approach is informed by an understanding of how
texts are constructed.

A communicative approach suggests that when learning a language, a learner should have an extensive exposure
to the target language (SASL) and many opportunities to practise or produce the language by communicating for
social or practical purposes. Language learning should be carried over into the classroom where skills are learned
through frequent opportunities to view and record texts.

Language teaching happens in an integrated way, with the teacher modelling good practice, the learners practising
the appropriate skills in groups before applying these skills on their own. The structure of each lesson should be one
that engages the whole class before practising in groups and applying the new skill individually

2.5 SIGN BILINGUALISM

Sign bilingualism is the use of two languages in different modalities, that is, a signed and either a spoken or written
language, and is distinctly different from using two spoken languages. In deaf education, sign-bilingualism uses
the signed language of the Deaf community and the written/spoken language of the hearing community amongst
whom the Deaf live. In South Africa, the signed language is SASL and the written/spoken would be one or more of
the several indigenous languages, such as Afrikaans, isiZulu, Sesotho, Xhosa or English. Acquisition of the signed
language is prioritized and there is a parallel strong influence on teaching reading and writing of the second language
which is introduced through the signed language to explain syntax and abstract concepts. The intention of the sign
bilingualism philosophy is to enable Deaf children to become bilingual and bicultural, and to participate fully in both
the hearing society and the ‘Deaf-World’. Rather than regard deafness as an obstacle to linguistic development,
educational achievement, social integration and linguistic pluralism is encouraged.

Researchers are of the view that for the deaf child to achieve first language competence in the formative years, the
child must be assured the right of access to signed language early in life, in an environment with skilled signers. The
national signed language should be the medium of teaching and learning for all subjects in the academic curriculum,
while one of the spoken languages will be the language of literacy. In facilitating bilingual educational programmes,
both languages should exist independently but be equal in status. Learners are taught face-to-face through the
medium of SASL and will read and write in the written language approved by the School Governing Body.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 14
 2.6 TIME ALLOCATION FOR THE HOME LANGUAGE

The teaching time for Home Language is 6 hours per week. All language content is taught within a three-week cycle (18
hours). Timetabling should make provision for continuous double periods per week. In a three-week cycle the following
time allocation for the different language skills is suggested.

 Skills Time Allocation per Three-week Cycle (Hours)
 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6
 * Observing and Signing 3 hours
 * Visual Reading and 7,5 hours
 Viewing
 * Recording 6 hours
 Language Structures 1,5 hour
 and Conventions
 *Language Structures and Conventions and their usage are integrated within
 the time allocation of the four language skills. There is also time allocated for
 formal practice. Thinking and reasoning skills are incorporated into the skills and
 strategies required for Observing and Signing, for Visual Reading and Viewing, and
 for Recording.

Suggestions for teaching times per week

The following grid gives an indication of how teaching time could be allocated to the different language skills.
Throughout the three-week cycle language/grammar must be taught explicitly.

 Time Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday
 1 hour Shared Visual Shared Shared Visual Shared Shared Visual
 Reading (for Recording – Reading ( a Recording – Reading (a new
 Observing establishing a new text or reflecting on text or continuation
 purposes) frame continuation progress and of a text read
 of a text “read” specific skills previously)
 previously)
 Discussions on Group and Discussions on Group and Discussions on
 the text using guided the text using guided the text using
 appropriate Recording appropriate Recording – appropriate
 language language peer and/or language structures
 structures structures teacher reviews (Signing)
 (Signing) (Signing) of planning and
 Reflecting on Reflecting on drafts Comprehension
 Visual Reading Visual Reading exercise (every
 third week) using
 the same text type
 30 minutes Individual Individual
 Recording Recording

 15 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 2.7 LEARNING AND TEACHING SUPPORT MATERIALS

Home language teachers should have:

(a) A Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement document

(b) Language in Education Policy

(c) Language textbook for resource purposes

(d) SASL Dictionary

(e) Literature genres

(f) A variety of media materials: news/ magazines items

(g) Access to visual aids to be used in the classroom

Classroom resources

a) Digital cameras / video recorders / tripods

b) Memory cards / flash drives

c) TV monitors and DVD players

d) Computers / software for editing

e) A range of DVDs to accommodate different reading levels

f) OPTIONAL: Webcam facilities / broadband internet access / smart-board/ smart phone with video recording
 and viewing capabilities

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 16
 SECTION 3: CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR SASL
 SKILLS
3.1 OVERVIEW OF SKILLS, CONTENT AND STRATEGIES
This section is divided into TWO components, the contents for the language skills and the Teaching
Plans.

3.1 Observing and Signing

Note: Observing and Signing is done with live signing and not with recorded SASL material.
Observing process

• Pre-observing – to prepare/orientate learners towards signed texts (set the context, generate interest, introduce
 vocabulary, predict content, activate existing knowledge and build prior knowledge).

• During observing – recognise, match, analyse the message, find meaning, ask questions, confirm predictions,
 reflect and evaluate.

• Post-observing – recall specific detail, ask questions, discuss what was signed, summarise the presentation,
 evaluate what was observed, do role-play, give personal views and relate content to own experience and reflect
 on the presentation.

Learners must follow the observing process and must be able to:

Observe with comprehension a variety of signed texts/communication activities (live)

Communicates experiences, ideas and information in different contexts for different audiences and purposes.

1. Conversations / dialogues
2. Informal group discussions
3. Storytelling
4. Directions
5. Instructions
6. Interviews
7. Prepared presentations
8. Unprepared presentations
9. Debates
10. Use of an interpreter
11. Role-plays
12. Non-fiction /information texts, reports, reviews

1. Conversations (communication for social purposes)

• Initiate and sustain conversations
• Follow turn taking conventions
• Share ideas and experiences and show understanding of concepts
• Stay on topic
• Ask relevant questions for clarity
• Fill in gaps and encourage the signer
• Respond to others’ ideas with empathy and respect
• Begin to identify, use and discuss key features such as context/register, signer’s body language, facial
 expressions, non-manual features, content and choice of signs
• Give balanced and constructive feedback
• Defend a position
• Negotiate

 17 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 2. Informal group discussions
Explore a range of ideas and experiences and show understanding of concepts.
• Initiate and sustain conversations
• Follow turn taking conventions
• Keep to the topic
• ”Listen to” one another
• Accept others’ points when necessary
• Make logical links between points
• Try to bring people into the discussion
• Interrupt politely where appropriate
• Express opinions and give reasons
• Defend a position
• Negotiate

3. Storytelling
• Identify and discuss the main message
• Recall specific detail in the story
• Discuss character, plot and setting
• Share ideas and justify opinions
• Ask and respond to challenging questions
• Reflect on values and messages
• “Re-tell” a story
• Understand and use roleshift where necessary
• Create and sign stories with a beginning, middle and ending, using descriptive sign language and showing
 elements of plot and characterisation

4. Directions
Uses directions when telling someone how to get somewhere.
• Use mostly the imperative form
• Consider the following when giving directions:
 o Use concise and clear sentences
 o Use the chronological order
 o Refer to a specific direction
 o Indicate the approximate distance
 o Give the approximate number of streets to be crossed to reach the destination
 o Provide information about landmarks along the way
 o Use signs indicating position
 o Use signs indicating direction
When receiving directions:
 o Ask for directions
 o Request clarification
 o Repeat directions for confirmation
 o Show appreciation

5. Instructions
e.g. explain the working or use of an article in operation; preparing dishes, repairing faults.
• Plan and prepare
 o Become familiar with the object or process
 o Consider vocabulary, grammar, expressions, technical language and phrases that might be used
 o Prepare clear and logical sequence of instructions
 o Use visual material e.g. instruction manuals with illustrations
• Sign the instructions
 (Reflecting the above planning and preparation)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 18
 6. Interviews
• Plan and prepare: determine aim, background information, outline, questions, time, place, sequencing, physical
 environment
• Using interviewing techniques in phases:
 o Introduction (identifying self; stating purpose)
 o Rapport (creating atmosphere of trust)
 o Questions (ask relevant open and closed questions, general to specific questions; use sensitive, respectful
 SASL; observe actively; evaluate responses)
 o Summary (summarise; sequence and arrange responses and important details in logical order)
 o Closure (thank interviewee; provide contact details)

7. Prepared presentations
• Choose an appropriate research topic
• Conduct some form of research
• Plan an introduction, body and conclusion
• Show clear logical links with topic
• Organise material coherently
• Use correct sign vocabulary, grammar/syntax and body language
• Use appropriate signing mode, size, intensity, pace, pausing, eye contact, posture and gestures
• Use non-manual features accurately
• Use roleshift where necessary
• Adjust style and register for different purposes and audiences
• Use visual aids, e.g. charts, posters, images where useful
• Use an interpreter effectively

8. Unprepared presentations
• Show some sense of structure
• Remain on the topic
• Keep presentation short but effective
• Use register, signing mode and language appropriate to the audience and purpose

9. Debates
Ensure that:
• Emotive and persuasive language is used
• Opinions expressed are supported
• Arguments are well-balanced by expressing agreement and disagreement

Debate procedures
• The class is divided into two teams: “for the topic” and “against the topic”
• The first argument is given by a member of the “for the topic” team
• The second argument is given by a member of the “against the topic” team
• The second “for the topic” signer states the argument of his/her team
• The second “against the topic” signer states the argument of his/her team
• The process is repeated until all the members of each team have presented their arguments
• The “for the topic” and the “against the topic” teams are given a 5-10 minute break to prepare their final
 arguments
• One member from each team presents the final argument
• The class votes for the winning argument

10. Use of an interpreter
Engage in communication activities that will help him/her to use an interpreter effectively in a variety of situations
with an understanding of the code of ethics.

11. Role-plays
Role-play different situations

 19 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 12. Non-fiction/information texts, reports, reviews
Give exact feedback of a situation, e.g. accident, any findings
• Plan: Collect and organise information and give facts
• Give a title, introduction (background, purpose and scope), body (Who? Why? Where? When? What? How?),
 conclusions, recommendations
• Use semiformal to formal language register and style

Footnote:
• Recognise that fingerspelling links to the written form of a spoken language
• Recognise and use appropriate fingerspelling in the above signed texts and communication activities

Length of text to be used for Observing and Signing:

 Texts Length of text
 (minutes)
 Informal group discussions/forum discussions 10 -15
 Prepared presentations 2-4
 Unprepared presentations 1-2
 Conversations/dialogues 3-4
 Interviews 5-8
 Directions and instructions 2-4
 Storytelling 3-5
 Debates 10 - 15
 Role-plays 2-4
 Non-fiction /information texts, reports, reviews 2-4

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 20
 3.2 Visual Reading and Viewing
Note: Visual Reading and Viewing is done with recorded SASL material and not with live signing.
Prescribed signed texts
“Read” for information and enjoyment
• Folklores
• Short stories
• Longer stories
• Dramas
• Poetry
• Interviews
• Reports
• Non-fiction texts with visuals (graphs, charts) e.g. instructional texts
• Non-fiction texts, e.g. reviews, news/magazine articles
• Visual literacy: advertisements, cartoons, comic strips, silent movies

Visual reading process
o ”Pre-reading” activities
o ”During reading” activities
o ”Post- reading” activities

“Pre-reading” activities
Learners may be prepared for the signed text in various ways depending on the type of signed text and the level of
the learner. “Pre-reading” activates associations and previous knowledge.
• Learners are encouraged to form certain expectations and predictions about the signed text based on clues
 from:
 o DVD cover pages,
 o table of contents/DVD chapters (root menu), and
 o accompanying pictures or photographs
• Suggest purpose and audience
• Express personal response to images
• Evaluate the image for effectiveness

“During reading” activities
The recorded signed text (e.g. DVD) will be paused during “reading” when needed for the following activities to
happen.
• Identify the main idea, the characters and the plot
• Infer meaning of unfamiliar signs and images by using contextual clues
• Rereading / reviewing
• Ask questions
• Clarify issues
• Answer higher order questions
• Make simple notes (main and supporting ideas) (not for assessment)

“Post-reading” activities
• Explain whether or not a story was liked and why
• Give an opinion on what was viewed
• Draw conclusions
• Answer open-ended and higher order questions based on the signed text
• Discuss the sequence of events, plot, setting, cultural values and cause and effect relations
• Identify key details in what was viewed
• Confirm purpose and audience
• Compare and contrast
• Explore the signed text for grammar and vocabulary learning
• Critical language awareness:

 21 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 o facts and opinion
 o cultural background of signed texts and author
 o show awareness of and interpret signing mode (emotional intention), pace and language use
 o understand the logical sequence of information
 o make assumptions and predict consequences
 o respond to language use, sign choice, language structure
• Summarise main and supporting ideas. This can be done in point or paragraph form

Poetry
Identify and discuss:
• Literal meaning
• Figurative meaning
• Figures of speech, imagery, sign choice, signing mode (emotional intention), emotional responses and
 interpretations
• Lines, signs, stanzas, rhyme, rhythm, eye gaze, pausing, refrain, alliteration (repetition of parameters)
• Analyse and discuss the five parameters in different sign utterances and how they impact on the meaning

Folklore, Stories, Longer Stories, Drama
Key features of signed texts
Identify and discuss:
• Plot
• Characterization
• Themes and messages
• Background and setting- in relation to character and theme
• Purpose and audience (register)

Length of texts to be used/”read”:

 Texts Number of Length of text
 texts (minutes)
 Poetry minimum 5 1-2
 Dramas minimum 1 4-8
 Short stories/folklore minimum 4 3-5
 Longer stories minimum 1 8 - 10
 Non-fiction minimum 4 3-5
 Summaries minimum 1 2

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 22
 3.3 Recording: process, content, strategies and signed texts
Good recording skills need to be developed and supported. Although visual reading is an important source of input,
it is only through presenting that presenting skills are developed. The recording process consists of the following:
• Planning / Pre-recording
• Drafting (recording)
• Revising
• Editing
• Final recording
• Publishing

During the recording and presenting process learners should do the following:

Planning/ Pre-recording
Uses planning strategies to initiate and draft a piece of formal SASL recording:
• Select a formal SASL text form to suit the purpose and audience (e.g. recipes, instructions, dialogues using
 role-shift and “letter” to a friend or family member)
• Record a selection of short formal SASL texts for different purposes (e.g. “letter” to a friend, instructions)
• Where appropriate, record a title that reflects the content
• Brainstorm ideas using e.g. mind maps, spider diagrams, flow charts or lists
• Consult relevant sources, select relevant information

Drafting (recording)
• Record for different purposes:
• Create simple texts such as dialogues, poems, simple interviews, one to two paragraph stories and personal
 experiences and events
• Produce a first draft which takes into account purpose, audience, topic and genre
• Use simple strategies for getting and recording information, such as carrying out simple surveys (e.g. age and
 gender of learners)
• Collect suitable pictures and graphics to illustrate recorded text
• Sign a title that reflects the content
• Determine sign choice by using appropriate, descriptive signs, phrases and expressions to make the signing
 clear and vivid
• Show own point of view by explaining values, beliefs and experiences
• Include specific details of the required signed text (use of roleshift, substantiating and motivating the argument)

Revising, editing, final recording
Revise formal SASL recording:
• View draft and discuss own and others’ recording to get or give feedback
• Edit own recording (e.g. deleting or adding signs to clarify meaning, re-ordering sentences, checking and
 correcting signs and formal SASL conventions)
• Revise own recording after getting feedback from others
• Record the final signed presentation
• Complete a recording task within a set time

Publishing
‘Publish’ (make public ) own recording:
• Share work with others by showing the recording in the classroom
• Introduce the recorded text to the audience
• Share recording with intended audience, such as family or friends
• Make own DVDs or contribute to class anthologies and/or SASL recordings
• Upload to social media platforms e.g. YouTube

 23 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Recorded signed texts:
1. Narrative texts (stories)
2. Character sketch
3. Poems
4. Information texts, reports (non-fiction)
5. “Speeches”
6. Dialogues (two or more signers)
7. Interviews
8. Instructions
9. Diary entries
10. Social media messages
11. Advertisements
12. Reviews
13. Reports

1. Narrative texts (stories)
A narrative essay is largely the presentation of a series of events in some meaningful order. The following are
 possible features of a narrative essay:
• Depict a story /a past event / fiction
• Use a story line that is convincing
• Establish a time frame (i.e. past, present, future) and mark time changes when needed
• Use a captivating introductory paragraph
• Use an interesting ending
• Ensure sustained interest with style and action
• Use descriptive elements

2. Character sketch
• This is a brief description of a character as if you were trying to introduce the character
• Include in the description aspects such as physical appearance, mannerisms and values

3. Poems
• Produce short simple poems
• Begin to use appropriate poetic devices, e.g. symmetry, alliteration (repetition of parameters), rhythm, imagery,
 pace and sign size
• Use appropriate SASL discourse conventions

4. Information texts, reports (non-fiction)
• Communicate ideas or information in a logical way
• Research ideas and support with evidence
• Clarify any unfamiliar concepts
• Organise logically
• Take the viewer from the known to the unknown
• Present in the present tense

5. “Speeches”
• Adapt the style to be used: when, where, why (purpose), who (audience) and what (content)
• Capture attention of the audience with an introduction
• Decide where to pause and where to use gestures (naturally) and for what purpose. (Keep eye-contact.)
• Use contrasting signing modes
• Use short sentences with simple ideas, using familiar examples
• Consider the closing. Leave the audience with a thought (or two)
• Use visual or physical aids effectively
• Use of notes is optional and only for reference

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 24
 6. Dialogues (two or more signers)
• Initiate the conversation
• Maintain topic
• Follow turn-taking rules
• Use SASL conventions appropriately including eye contact, register, style
• Conclude the dialogue

7. Interviews
• Introduce the interviewee and interviewer
• Probe the interviewee by asking questions
• Portray the interviewee‘s strong points, talents, weak points

8. Instructions
Give instructions when describing how something is done.
• Instructions must be in chronological order
• Plan and prepare
 o Become familiar with the object or process
 o Consider vocabulary, grammar, expressions, technical language and phrases that might be used
 o Prepare clear and logical sequence of instructions
 o Use visual material
• Record the instructions
 (Reflecting the above planning and preparation)

9. Diary entries
• A diary is a portrayal of daily events
• Present his/her evaluation of the day or event
• Record from the signer‘s point of view
• The language choice is simple and to the point
• Use every day language and keep to the point
• The signing mode will be determined by the nature of the entry

10. Social media messages
These are the signed equivalent of written letters (transactional texts)
• Friend / family member
• Invitations
11. Advertisements
• Keep the attention of the viewer – ensuring that the important signs stand out.
• Create a desire to own the product or use the service.
• Consider the following in designing:
 o The target market (for whom the advertisement is intended)
 o Positioning (where and when the advertisement will appear – in what media, at what time and where in the
 programme?)
 o Appeals (to what sense is the advertisement appealing?)
 o The structure
 o The attitude (sincere or not) and the ratio between fact and opinion
 o The effectiveness of the choice of colour or lack thereof
 o The language used (whether it is clichéd, repetitive, figurative or rhetorical)

 25 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 12. Reviews
Reviews seldom follow a set pattern. These do not have to cover any specific aspects of the signed text, film or
DVD. Generally, reviewers establish what it is they are reviewing and who is involved. Good reviews attempt to be
fair but honest. Humour is not uncommon in reviews. Present reviews from different sources to show learners how
varied this form can be.
 • Reflect an individual’s response to a work of art, film, signed text or occasion
 • Project his/her ‘judgement’ on the work presented
 • The viewer of the review does not have to agree with the reviewer
 • Two reviewers may respond differently to the same text
 • Give relevant facts, for example, the name of the author/producer/artist, the title of the signed text/work, the
 name of the publisher/production company, as well as the price (where applicable)

13. Reports
Reports are formal documents and work best when what is examined is real and important to the learners. Give
exact feedback of a situation, e.g. accident, any findings.
• Plan: collect and organise information; sign facts
• Give a title, introduction (background, purpose and scope), body (Who? Why? Where? When? What? How?),
 conclusions, recommendations, references, appendices
• Use semiformal to formal language register and style
• Use
 o Present tense (except historical reports)
 o The third person (roleshifting as needed)
 o Factual description
 o Technical words and phrases
 o Formal, impersonal language

Footnote:
• Use fingerspelling appropriately as per SASL conventions, e.g. proper nouns (people and place names), titles
 of texts
• Use acronyms appropriate to different media and audiences

Length of recorded texts to be produced:

 Texts Length of text (minutes)
 Narrative texts (stories) 2-4
 “Speeches” 1-2
 Dialogues 2-3
 Interviews 1-2
 Information/instructional texts/reports 2-3
 Reviews 1-2
 Poems 1-2
 Social media messages 1-2
 Character sketches 1-2
 Advertisements 1-2

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 26
 3.4 Language structures and conventions

The table below shows the language structures and conventions that learners are expected to learn
during the observing, signing, visual reading, viewing, recording and presenting processes. These
structures should be taught in context in an integrated manner using different types of signed and visual
texts. They should be taught explicitly with time set aside as required.

Language structures Types
Phonology Parts of signs
 • Parameters (handshape, orientation, location, movement and NMF)
 Type of signs
 • Free space, no contact (1 hand)
 • Any place on body, not opposite hand (1 hand)
 • Both hands active; identical motor acts (2 hands)
 • One hand active, one hand passive; same HS (2 hands)
 • One hand active, one hand passive; different HS (2 hands)
 • Compounds (combine some of the above (2 hands)
 • Non-manual signs (articulated on the face only)

 • Minimal pairs:
 o Stokoe principle (2 signs that differ only with one parameter)
Morphology o Morpheme (smallest meaningful unit in a language), e.g. SASL – 2 people
 walking (2 morphemes)

 • Morphological process
 o Noun-verb pairs (segmental structure), e.g. SASL – BROOM SWEEP
 o Compounds, e.g. ASL – good night; SASL - mother father – parent)

 • Plural (e.g. classifiers; repeating the noun/reduplication; adjective)
 • Lexicalised fingerspelling (signs made up from fingerspelled words), e.g.
 BMW
 • Numeral incorporation (sign changes to incorporate numbers)

 • Predicates
 Ø Temporal aspect (from AUSLAN, BSL and ASL)
 o Simple/punctual
 - Repetitive/iterative
 - Habitual
 Ø Verbs
 o Function of space (agreement)
 o Plain verbs (one location)
 o Indicating verbs (agreement/directional verbs) (move towards people,
 objects - involve orientation and location) locative verbs – where the
 location has meaning (e.g. throw a ball)
 o Transitive and intransitive verbs
 o Classifiers - combining movement with handshape

 27 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Syntax Major sign categories (lexical) (parts of speech)
 • Nouns
 • Predicates (say something about the subject of a sentence; may be nouns,
 verbs or adjectives)
 • Adjectives are placed after a noun in SASL
 • Adverbs
 o of time
 o of manner
 o of location
 o of intensification

 Minor sign categories (functional) (parts of speech)
 • Determiners
 • Modals
 • Prepositions
 o Basic prepositions
 o Classifiers
 • Conjunctions
 • Pronouns (placement and indexing)

 Basic sentence types (sign order)
 • Statements
 • Questions
 o Yes-no
 o Wh
 o Question mark wiggle
 o Rhetorical

 • Negation (manual and non-manual)
 • Commands
 • Topicalisation
 • Conditionals (complex)
 • Compound sentences
 • Tense – marked by separate lexical items, e.g. LAST NIGHT
Semantics (meaning of signs) • Sign meaning
 o concrete nouns
 o abstract nouns
 o synonyms
 o antonyms, contrast

 • Sentence/Utterance meaning
 o Figures of speech
 - Simile
 o Metaphor/symbol (iconicity – movements up is good, down is bad; chest
 as container – things inside chest is invisible but can be taken out to
 examine/discuss it)
 o Personification (when an object becomes a person)
 o Idioms (e.g. JAW-DROP; EYE-POP-OUT)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 28
 Discourse • Register, style and genre
 • Register variations: formal (e.g. lecture) versus informal (e.g. story) signing
 • Cohesion (sign posting or referring words; role of repetition; discourse
 markers/ transition signs) and coherence (establishing and maintaining
 topics)
 • Roleshift (constructed action) – links to cohesion and coherence
 • Chunking (paragraphing): ways of dividing up signed text
 • Rhetorical statements, questions and commands

 Two kinds of signed texts:
 • Monologue (one person signing)
 o Prepared presentations
 o Unprepared presentations
 o Roleshift/dialogue
 o Roleshift/interview
 o Forum discussions
 o Debates
 o Poems
 o “Speeches”
 o Story telling

 • Dialogue (two or more people involved in a conversation)
 o Directions
 o Instructions
 o Informal discussions/ conversations
 o Dialogues
 o Interviews
 o Dramas
Fingerspelling • Neutral fingerspelling -- Commonly ﬁngerspelled English words, such as
 proper nouns (e.g., names of people, cities, companies, brand names, and
 technical terms).

 • Lexicalized fingerspelling - ﬁngerspelled words are altered or lexicalized to
 become more sign-like – SASL sign for DO.

 • Initialized signs - An initialized sign uses the handshape that corresponds
 to the ﬁrst letter of a written word (e.g., UNCLE). Some common initialized
 signs are items in a category, such as family members.

 29 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 RECOMMENDED TEXTS/RESOURCES FOR THE PHASE

Classroom resources

• 
 Digital cameras / video recorders / tripods
• 
 Memory cards / flash drives
• 
 TV monitors and DVD players
• 
 Computers / software for editing
• 
 A range of DVDs to accommodate different reading levels
• 
 OPTIONAL: Webcam facilities / broadband internet access / smart-board/ tablets/ smart phone with video
 recording and viewing capabilities

Grade 4
• Informational texts e.g. signed news / magazine items
• Visual aids/props (prepared presentation) (e.g. bar graphs, charts, mind maps, maps)
• Instructions/procedures
• Directions
• Descriptions
• Poems
• Weather reports
• Factual reports of events
• Journal/diary entries/vlog /social media messages e.g. friendly “letter”
• Biography / character sketch
• Drama
• Advertisements
• Deaf jokes
• Recorded conversations/dialogues
• Recorded interview scripts
• DVDs with stories (fiction and non-fiction), myths, fables, legends, Deaf culture stories and poems
• Deaf television programmes (e.g. DTV, SABC programmes, Zwakala)
• Sign language dictionary for children
• Debate

Grade 5
• Informational text e.g. news items
• Visual aids/props (prepared presentation) (e.g. bar graphs, charts, mind maps, maps)
• Instructions/procedures
• Directions
• Descriptions
• Poems
• Factual reports (e.g. posters, photographs, bar graphs, pie charts, tables, mind maps, diagrams)
• Journal/diary entries/social media messages e.g. friendly “letter”
• Biography/ character sketch
• Drama/plays
• Advertisements
• Deaf jokes
• Recorded dialogues
• Recorded interview
• DVDs with stories (fiction and non-fiction), myths, fables, legends and poems

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 30
 • Deaf television programmes (e.g. DTV, SABC programmes, Zwakala)
• Sign language dictionary for children
• Debate
• Signed review

Grade 6
• Informational texts e.g. signed news items and reports
• Instructions/procedures/ directions
• Descriptive essays
• DVD review
• Poems
• Factual reports (e.g. photographs, graphs, charts, tables, maps, diagrams)
• Biography / character sketch and autobiography
• Drama/plays
• Persuasive texts e.g. advertisements, “speech”
• Recorded monologues and dialogues
• Recorded interviews
• DVDs with stories (fiction and non-fiction), myths, fables, legends and poems
• Deaf television programmes (e.g. DTV, SABC programmes, Zwakala, documentaries, cartoons)
• Sign language dictionary for older children
• Debate
• Journal/diary entries/social media messages e.g. friendly “letter”
• Summary of a story

 31 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 3.5 Teaching Plans

 Grade 4

CAPS
 Term and Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Language Structures & Conventions
 Week

 Term 1

 1-3 Observe a short story “Read” a short signed story Record a story based on a personal Phonology:
 “Retell” a story Reflect on texts viewed independently experience/event Parameters
 Give and receive directions “Read” instructions, e.g. how to make a cup Record instructions, e.g. how to make a cup Type of signs
 of tea of tea

 4-6 Observe a story “Read” a signed story Record a story Morphology:
 “Retell” a story “Read” a signed poem Record a simple poem Plural
 Observe and discuss an instructional text, e.g. Simple classifiers
 recipe
 Syntax/Semantics:
 Concrete nouns: common, proper, countable
 and uncountable nouns

 7–9 Observe and discuss current issues based on “Read” non-fiction/ information text, e.g. Record a news report based on a personal Syntax/Semantics:
 non-fiction signed text, e.g. news or magazine signed news item experience/event Basic sentence types: Statements,
 item questions
 Reflect on text “read” independently
 Prepared presentation Discourse:
 Register variations

 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:
 • Observe and “retell” a story • Reflect on text “read” • Publish recorded text • Classifiers
 • Give and receive directions/ instructions • “Read” a signed poem • Nouns

SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6
 32
 Term 2

 1-3 Observe signed information/non-fiction text, “Read” information text with visuals Record information text, e.g. weather chart Syntax/ Semantics:

 33
 e.g. weather reports Sentence types:
 Questions – Wh; Yes/No

 Discourse:
 Rhetoricals

 4-6 Observe and discuss a short story “Read” a short story Record a description of a character Syntax/ Semantics:
 Adjectives
 Observe and carry out instructions “Read” an instructional text Record an instructional text, e.g. how to
 make a sandwich Synonyms; Antonyms

 Discourse:
 Cohesion and coherence
 Chunking

 7–9 Observe and discuss a story “Read” stories Record a story Syntax/ Semantics:
 Adjectives
 Adverbs of manner
 Observe and give directions Reflect on texts read independently Pronouns (placement and indexing)

 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

 Term 3

 1-3 Participate in group discussion “Read” a longer story Record diary entries Morphology:
 Debate Verbs: Indicating verbs; plain verbs

 4-6 Observe and discuss information text with “Read” information text with visuals, e.g. on Record a descriptive chunk, e.g. landscape, Morphology:
 visuals social issues building Numeral incorporation
 Reflect on texts read independently Record information from a table/graph/map Compounds
 into a paragraph Lexicalised fingerspelling

 7–9 Observe and report on an interview “Read” a poem Record a poem Syntax/ Semantics:

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Conduct an interview Figures of speech: personification, simile,
 “Read” a drama Record a dialogue
 Unprepared presentation metaphor, idioms

 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:
 • Group discussion • “Read” an information text
 • Publish recorded text • Verbs
 • Conduct an interview • “Read” a recorded interview
 Term 4

 1-3 Observe a news/magazine item “Read” a signed news/magazine item that Record a news / magazine item about a Morphology:
 highlights social issues social issue Predicates:
 Participate in group discussions

CAPS
 Temporal aspects: simple/punctual –
 repetitive/ iterative, habitual

 Syntax/ Semantics:
 Tense

 4-6 Observe a short story “Read” a short story Record a social media message (friendly Syntax/ Semantics:
 Observe a dialogue “Read” a signed drama “letter”)/ diary entry Adverbs of time, manner, location,
 Record a character sketch intensification

 7–8 Debate “Read” information text, e.g. signed Record an advertisement Syntax/ Semantics:
 advertisement Modals
 Basic sentence types: Question mark wiggle

 9 - 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6
 34
 Grade 5
 Term and Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Language Structures & Conventions
 Week

 35
 Term 1
 1-3 Observe and discuss a signed story “Read” a story Record a descriptive/ narrative text (story) Phonology:
 Parameters
 Type of signs
 4-6 Observe and discuss an information text “Read” signed non-fiction/ information text Record non-fiction/ informational text Morphology:
 Plural
 Present an unprepared presentation Numeral incorporation
 Classifiers

 Syntax/Semantics:
 Concrete nouns
 Abstract nouns
 7–9 Observe and respond to a signed news item “Read” a signed news item Record a news item Syntax/Semantics:
 Basic sentence types:
 Observe and report on an interview “Read” a poem Record a poem Statements, negations, questions

 Discourse:
 Conduct an interview
 Register, style and genre

 Syntax/ Semantics:
 Figures of speech: simile, metaphor,
 personification, idioms
 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:
 • Observe and discuss a signed story • “Read” a story or poem • Publish recorded text • Classifiers
 • Observe and discuss an information text • “Read” a non-fiction text • Basic sentence types

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Term 2
 1-3 Give and follow instructions and directions “Read” an instructional text containing a Record instructions, e.g. how to make a Syntax/Semantics:
 sequence of instruction sandwich Sentence types:
 Questions – Wh; Yes/No; Rhetorical

CAPS
 Discourse:
 Rhetoricals
 4-6 Participate in interviews to collect information “Read” a report with visuals Record a report Syntax/ Semantics:
 Adjectives
 Synonyms, Antonyms
 Participate in group discussion Conjunctions

 Discourse:
 Cohesion and coherence
 Chunking
 7–9 Observe a signed story “Read” a story Record a story Syntax/ Semantics:
 or Figures of speech: simile, metaphor,
 “Read” a poem Record a poem personification, idioms

 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment
 Term 3
 1-3 Observe and participate in a debate “Read” an advertisement Record an advertisement Morphology:
 Numeral incorporation
 Present a prepared presentations Compounds
 4-6 Describe events “Read” a drama Record a dramatic dialogue Morphology:
 Verbs: Indicating verbs; plain verbs; transitive
 Present an unprepared presentation and intransitive verbs
 Lexicalised fingerspelling
 7–9 Observe and discuss stories “Read” a longer story Record an informational text, e.g. a news Syntax/ Semantics:
 item Adjectives
 Observe and discuss a non-fiction report, e.g. a “Read” a signed review Adverbs
 signed review Record a signed review Pronouns (placement and indexing)
 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:
 • Present an unprepared presentation • “Read” an advertisement • Publish recorded text • Verbs
 • “Read” a signed review • Compounds

SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6
 36
 Term 4
 1-3 Observe a signed story “Read” a story Record a descriptive essay Syntax/ Semantics:

 37
 Act out the story (role-play) Adverbs of time, manner, location,
 intensification
 4-6 Observe a report, e.g. signed news and topical “Read” an information text with visuals (e.g. Record a report with visuals Morphology:
 issues pictures/ diagrams/maps) Predicates:
 Record an instructional text
 Present a signed report “Read” an instructional text, e.g. recipe, Temporal aspects: simple/punctual –
 directions repetitive/ iterative, habitual
 Observe and discuss an instructional text, e.g. Syntax/ Semantics:
 recipe, directions Tense
 7–8 Observe and discuss information text “Read” information text with visuals Record a social media message (friendly Syntax/ Semantics:
 “letter”)/ a diary entry Modals
 Basic sentence types: Question mark wiggle
 9 - 10 Summative assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Grade 6

 Term and Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Language Structures & Conventions
 Week

CAPS
 Term 1

 1-3 Debate “Read” a signed persuasive text Record a persuasive text, e.g. “speech”/ Phonology:
 advert Parameters
 Type of signs
 Minimal pairs: Stokoe principle

 4-6 Observe and discuss a signed news report “Read” signed news item Record a news item Morphology:
 Classifiers
 Give and follow instructions “Read” a drama
 Syntax/Semantics:
 Abstract nouns
 Determiners

 7-9 Observe and discuss a dialogue “Read” a story Record a story or Syntax/Semantics:
 Present an unprepared presentation “Read” a poem Record a poem Basic sentence types:
 Record a dialogue Statements, negations, questions,
 commands, topicalisation, conditionals,
 compound

 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:
 • Debate • “Read” a signed persuasive text • Publish recorded text • Minimal pairs
 • Basic sentence types

 Term 2

 1-3 Observe and discuss instructional text, e.g. “Read” an instructional text, e.g. a recipe Record an instructional text, e.g. on how to Syntax/Semantics:
 recipe, directions make a cup of tea Prepositions

 4-6 Prepared presentation “Read” a longer story Record a review on a signed text Syntax/ Semantics:
 Adjectives
 Synonyms
 Antonyms

 Discourse:
 Cohesion and coherence

SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6
 Chunking

 7–9 Observe and discuss an information text , e.g. “Read” an information text, e.g. a news Record an information text, e.g. a news Syntax/ Semantics:
 a news report report report Figures of speech: simile, metaphor,

 38
 Participate in group discussion personification, idioms

 10 Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment
 Term 3

 1-3 Observe and participate in interviews “Read” an interview Record an interview Discourse:

 39
 Roleshift

 4-6 Observe and discuss a story “Read” and discuss drama Record a character sketch Morphology:
 Verbs: Indicating verbs; plain verbs;
 “Read” reviews of play/ drama Record a dialogue / a short play script transitive and intransitive verbs;
 Function of space

 7–9 Observe a signed humourous story “Read” a short humourous story Record a humorous story Syntax/ Semantics:
 Adjectives
 Record a social media message (friendly Adverbs
 “letter”)/ a diary entry Pronouns (placement and indexing)

 10 Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation: Consolidation:
 • Observe and participate in interviews • “Read” a drama • Publish recorded text • Roleshift
 • Observe and discuss signed stories • “Read” a review

 Term 4

 1-3 Observe and discuss a signed information text “Read” an information text Record a descriptive chunk Syntax/ Semantics:
 Adverbs of time, manner, location,
 intensification
 Present a prepared presentation “Read” a poem Record a poem
 Syntax/ Semantics:
 Figures of speech: simile, metaphor,
 personification, idioms

 4–6 Observe a signed story “Read” a story Record a short summary Morphology:
 Predicates:
 Temporal aspects: simple/punctual –
 “Read” a summary of the story repetitive/ iterative, habitual

 Syntax/ Semantics:

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Tense

 7-8 Observe and discuss an instructional text, e.g. “Read” an instructional text, e.g. recipe, Record an instructional text Syntax/ Semantics:
 recipe, directions directions Modals
 Basic sentence types: Question mark wiggle
 Unprepared presentation

 9 - 10 Summative assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment Summative Assessment
 SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT IN SASL HOME LANGUAGE
4.1 INTRODUCTION

Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the
performance of learners. It involves four steps: generating and collecting evidence of achievement; evaluating
evidence; recording the findings and using information to understand and thereby assist the learner’s development
in order to improve the process of learning and teaching.

Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning). In both cases
regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance the learning experience.

Assessment in SASL can either be conducted on live signing or signing that is recorded. For Observing and Signing
and Visual Reading and Viewing the learner always produces live signing. It can either be assessed during the
signing or immediately after by recording on a rubric/checklist or the live signing can be recorded by the teacher for
assessment later on. These recordings can be used for moderation, as a basis for feedback to the learner and can
become part of the learner’s portfolio of work. For Recording all work produced is recorded by the learner and handed
to the teacher for assessment.

Assessment in Languages is ongoing and supports the growth and development of learners. It is an integral part of
teaching and learning as it provides feedback for teaching and learning. It should be incorporated in teaching and
learning instead of being dealt with as a separate entity. Furthermore, integrated assessment of various language
aspects should be practiced. For example, we could start off with a visual reading piece and do a comprehension test.
Language knowledge questions could also be addressed based on the same text. “Post-reading” the text learners
could be asked to respond to the text by, for example, recording a text about the issues raised or to sign some
creative response to the content of the text. To wrap up this activity, discussions could be held about the topic and in
this way we address all of the language skills in one fluent, integrated activity.

Assessing the different language skills should not be seen as separate activities but one integrated activity. Assessment
rubrics should thus address the different language skills in the task.

Learners’ Observing skills, signing competence, ability to answer questions, participation in discussions and
Recording skills where necessary should be observed daily.

It is important, too, that learners’ understanding of what they are viewing is assessed and not just their ability to
recognise signs. Assessment of visual reading should therefore also take place regularly and not just be a once- off
assessment. Formal visual reading assessment should focus on activities which help you to determine how much the
learner has understood, for example, “retelling” a story or answering questions.

Assessment of recorded work will focus primarily on the learner’s ability to convey meaning, as well as how correctly
they have signed, for example, correct language structures and conventions used. All assessment should recognise
that language learning is a process and that learners will not produce a completely correct piece of work the first time
round. Therefore the various stages in the recording process should also be assessed.

When giving a formal assessment task, there will be a focus on a particular skill, for example, Observing and Signing
or Visual Reading or Recording. However, because language learning is an integrated process, more than one skill
will be used. The language structures should be assessed in context. It must be ensured that assessment is not only
done as recorded work, but allows for live signing tasks too. It is important to assess what learners understand and
not what they can just memorise, so assess skills in context as much as possible.

Teaching and assessment of languages should make provision for inclusion of all learners, and strategies should be
found to assist all learners to access or produce language texts. Some students experiencing barriers may not be
able to attain some of the aims as they are presented in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 40
 The programme of assessment allows for summative assessment, which could take the form of a test or examination,
at the end of every term. The work on which assessment is conducted must have been covered during the term. The
assessment items must be pitched at different cognitive levels to ensure validity.

4.2 INFORMAL OR DAILY ASSESSMENT

Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on a learner’s achievement that can
be used to improve their learning.

Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations, discussions,
practical demonstrations, learner–teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, etc. Informal assessment
may be as simple as stopping during the lesson to observe learners or to discuss with learners how learning is
progressing. Assessment of language competence will be in the form of observation, recorded exercises, signed
activities and presentations, tests and other forms of assessment. Informal assessment should be used to provide
feedback to the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but need not be recorded. It should not be seen as
separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom and you may use many of your learning activities to
assess learners’ performance informally. In some cases, you might want to set specific assessment type of activities
to motivate your learners to learn. Learners or teachers can mark these assessment tasks.

It is suggested that you use the first two-weeks of the term to do a baseline assessment of learners. You should use
the activities given in the first two-weeks of the teaching plans to do this assessment. This will enable you to establish
the kind of attention your learners will need as you proceed.

Self assessment and peer assessment actively involves learners in assessment. This is important as it allows learners
to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily assessment tasks are not formally
recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. Teachers may however which to keep their own informal records of how
individual learners are progressing in the different aspects of the subject to assist with planning and ensuring that
individual learners develop the required skills and understanding. The results of daily assessment tasks are not taken
into account for promotion and certification purposes.

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as Formal
Assessment. Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression purposes.
All Formal Assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance and to ensure that
appropriate standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing
in a grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, practical tasks,
projects, signed presentations, demonstrations (such as “retelling” a story, matching), performances (such as acting),
essays, participation in signed tasks (such as dialogues, conversations, discussions) and recorded tasks (such as
stories, poems, news items and other types of texts).

The purpose of designing a Programme of Assessment (POA) is to ensure validity, reliability, fairness and sufficiency
of assessment by giving explicit guidance on the types of activities and the percentage allocated to each language
skill within a task. It also addresses the focus of assessment, i.e. the way tasks should be addressed.

In formal assessment, use memoranda, rubrics, checklists and rating scales as well as other appropriate assessment
tools to observe, assess and record learners’ levels of understanding and skill. Choose an assessment tool that is
most appropriate for the type of activity. For example, a rubric is more suitable than a memorandum for a creative
text. A memorandum is better suited to a comprehension activity.

 41 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 4.3.1 Formal Assessment requirements for SASL Home Language

The formal Programme of Assessment for Grades 4-6 comprises of seven (7) tasks which make up 75% of the
promotion mark and one end-of-the-year examination for the final 25%.

The formal assessment requirements for SASL Home Language are as follows:

• Two formal assessment tasks to be completed at the end of each of the first three terms AND one in the fourth
 term. One of the tasks must be a mid-year examination. The total number of formal tasks should be seven.
 These seven formal assessment tasks make up 75% of the total mark for SASL Home Language in Grades 4,
 5 and 6. This formal assessment mark will include the mid-year examination.

• The first formal assessment task in each term should be done in the middle of the term. The second formal
 assessment task in each term should be done towards the end of the term.

• There will be an examination at the year-end which will count for 25% of the mark.

• Each formal assessment task should be made up of activities that assess Observing and Signing, Visual Reading
 and Viewing, Recording, and Language Structures and Conventions, and should take place over a period of
 days. Language Structures and Conventions should be assessed in context.

• Formal assessment tasks must assess a range of aspects of the language skills so that key aspects will be
 assessed over the course of the term and the year. Ensure that these aspects have been informally assessed
 and feedback given to the learner before they are formally assessed.

• All assessment in the Intermediate Phase is internal.

4.3.2 The form of tasks per term

The forms of assessment used should be age and developmental level appropriate. The design of these tasks should
cover the content of the subject and include a variety of tasks designed to achieve the objectives of the subject. It
should be based on the knowledge and skills done during that term. Use the Teaching Plans for each grade to select
the kind of activities and the set of skills required for each part of the formal assessment task, i.e. you can only
expect learners to ‘produce and record’ what you have already taught.

Formal assessment must cater for a range of cognitive levels as shown below. A variety of types of signed questions
such as multiple choice, comparison and direct questions should be used. These questions are all recorded in SASL.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 42
 Cognitive Levels for Assessment

Cognitive levels Activity Percentage of task
Literal Questions that deal with information explicitly stated in the
 text.
(Level 1)
 • Name the things/people/places/elements …
 • State the facts/reasons/points/ideas …
 • Identify the reasons/persons/causes …
 • List the points/facts/names/reasons …
 • Describe the place/person/character ...
 Levels 1 and 2: 40%
 • Relate the incident/episode/experience …

Reorganisation Questions that require analysis, synthesis or organisation of
 information explicitly stated in the text.
(Level 2)
 • Summarize the main points/ideas/pros/cons/ …
 • Group the common elements/factors …
 • State the similarities/differences …
 • Give an outline of …
Inference Questions that require a candidate’s engagement with
 information explicitly stated in the text in terms of his/her
(Level 3) personal experience.

 • Explain the main idea …

 • Compare the ideas/attitudes/actions …

 • What is the author’s/signer’s (or character’s) intention /
 attitude/ motivation/reason …
 Level 3: 40%
 • Explain the cause/effect of …

 • What does an action/comment/attitude (etc.) reveal about
 the narrator/ author/signer/ character …

 • How does the metaphor/simile/image affect your
 understanding …

 • What, do you think, will be the outcome/effect of an action/a
 situation …

 43 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Cognitive levels Activity Percentage of task
Evaluation These questions deal with judgments
 concerning value and worth. These include
(Level 4) judgments regarding reality, credibility, facts
 and opinions, validity, logic and reasoning,
 and issues such as the desirability and
 acceptability of decisions and actions in
 terms of moral values.
 • Do you think that what transpires is
 credible/realistic/ possible …?
 • Is the author’s/signer’s argument valid/
 logical/conclusive …
 • Discuss/Comment critically on the action/
 intention/ motive/ attitude/suggestion/
 implication …
 • Do you agree with the view/statement/
 observation/ interpretation that…
 • In your view, is the author/signer/narrator/
 character justified in suggesting/ advocating
 that … (Substantiate your response/Give
 reasons for your answer.)
 • Is the character’s attitude/behaviour/action
 justifiable or acceptable to you? Give a
 reason for your answer.
 Levels 4 and 5: 20%
 • What does a character’s actions/attitude(s)/
 motives … show about him/her in the
 context of universal values?
 • Discuss critically/Comment on the value
 judgements made in the text.

Appreciation These questions are intended to assess the
 psychological and aesthetic impact of the text
(Level 5) on the candidate. They focus on emotional
 responses to the content, identification with
 characters or incidents, and reactions to the
 author’s/signer’s use of language (such as
 sign choice and imagery).
 • Discuss your response to the text/incident/
 situation/ conflict/dilemma.
 • Do you empathize with the character? What
 action/decision would you have taken if you
 had been in the same situation?
 • Discuss/Comment on the author’s/signer’s
 use of language …
 • Discuss the effectiveness of the author’s/
 signer’s style/ introduction/ conclusion/
 imagery/metaphors/use of poetic
 techniques/ literary devices …

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 44
 4.4 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT

The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout
a term. A Programme for Assessment must be drawn up by the school indicating the dates on which tasks will be
done.

Subject requirements

Requirements for the compilation of a task are given in percentages. Where the programme indicates 20% for a
language skill it means that in the final allocation of marks for that language skill should be 20% of the total and not
twenty marks. Schools are not limited to a number of marks allocated to a language skill as long as the weighting for
each language skill is observed for each task according to the percentage allocated in the assessment programme.
For example, in Grade 4, a language knowledge test may be set for 50 marks or more, as long as the final weighting
does not exceed the weighting indicated in the assessment programme.

In Recording, parts of the planning process or the whole process should be assessed at least once per term. The
length of texts for Recording as indicated in Section 3.3 should be strictly adhered to.

The following tables provide the formal assessment requirements for SASL Home Language:

Examinations

Content for the examination should be drawn from the work done in the period preceding the examination and should
be a selection of skills and activities that will enable the learner to show that he/she is ready to engage with the work
in the next period/year.

The examination will consist of the following:

• Visual Reading comprehension, including vocabulary work

• Recording of a short creative text, including appropriate and correct usage of SASL grammar and conventions

• Recording of a short transactional (information/media/social) text, including appropriate and correct usage of
 SASL grammar and conventions

• Language Structures and Conventions to show knowledge and understanding of SASL grammar and
 conventions

• Observing and Signing skills will be assessed as Paper 1, prior to the formal examination time-table. However,
 it is expected that a summative mark, based on the formal assessments done for Observing and Signing, will
 be allocated as an examination mark.

 The following tables provide the formal assessment requirements for SASL Home Language:

 45 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 The Programme of Assessment table

 TERM 1

CAPS
 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 Task 1 % Task 1 % Task 1 %

 Narrative / descriptive text Narrative / descriptive text Signed news report

 Observe and “retell” a short Observe and discuss a signed Observe and discuss a
 25 20 20
 story story signed news report

 Language Structures and Language Structures and Language Structures and
 15 15 20
 Conventions in context Conventions in context Conventions in context

 “Read” a signed short story and “Read” a signed story and “Read” a signed news item
 reflect on it independently 35 reflect on it independently 35 and reflect on text “read” 30
 independently

 Record a simple short Record a descriptive narrative Record a news item
 story based on a personal 25 text 30 30
 experience

 Total 100 Total 100 Total 100

 Task 2 % Task 2 % Task 2 %

 Literature (poetry) Literature (poetry) Literature (poetry)

 Present a prepared Present an unprepared Present an unprepared
 presentation presentation presentation
 20 20 20

 “Read” a signed poem. “Read” a signed poem. Comprehension test (poem)
 30 30 30
 Comprehension test (poem) Comprehension test (poem)

 Language Structures and Language Structures and Language Structures and

 Conventions in context 20 Conventions in context 20 Conventions in context 20

 Record a simple poem 30 Record a poem. 30 Record a poem 30

SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6
 Total 100 Total 100 Total 100

 46
 TERM 2

 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 47
 Task 1 % Task 1 % Task 1 %

 Information text Information text Instructional text

 Observe and carry out Observe and follow Observe and discuss
 instructions. Observe and give 25 instructions and directions 20 instructional text, e.g. recipe, 20
 directions directions

 Language Structures and Language Structures and Language Structures and
 15 15 2
 Conventions in context Conventions in context Conventions in context

 “Read” a report with visuals “Read” a report with visuals “Read” an information text
 and reflect on text “read” 35 and reflect on text “read” 35 and reflect on text “read” 30
 independently independently independently

 Record an informational text Record a report Record an instructional text
 25 30 30
 with visuals

 Total 100 Total 100 Total 100

 Task 2 (June test/ Task 2 (June test/ Task 2 (June test/
 % % %
 examination) examination) examination)

 Paper 1: Paper 1: Paper 1:
 30 30 30
 Observing and Signing Observing and Signing Observing and Signing

 Paper 2 (1 hour): Paper 2 (1 hour): Paper 2 (1 hour):
 25 25 25
 Visual Reading comprehension Visual Reading comprehension Visual Reading comprehension
 15 15 15
 Language in context Language in context Language in context

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Paper 3 (1 hour): Paper 3 (1 hour): Paper 3 (1 hour):
 30 30 30
 Recording Recording Recording

 Total 100 Total 100 Total 100
 TERM 3

 Task 1 % Task 1 % Task 1 %

 Narrative texts Narrative texts Interview

CAPS
 Participate in a group Observe and participate in a Observe and participate in an
 25 20 20
 discussion debate interview

 Language Structures and Language Structures and Language Structures and
 Conventions in context 20
 Conventions in context 15 15 Conventions in context

 “Reads” an informational text “Read” a drama / longer story “Read” an interview and reflect
 on social issues and reflect on and reflect on text “read” on text “read” independently
 text read independently 35 independently 35 30

 Independently

 Record diary entries Record a dramatic dialogue / Record an interview
 25 30 30
 signed review

 Total 100 Total 100 Total 100

 Task 2 % Task 2 % Task 2 %

 Dialogue/drama Dialogue/drama Narrative text

 Observe and a report on an Present a prepared Observe and discuss a story
 interview presentation about an
 20 advertisement 20 20
 Conduct an interview

 “Read” a recorded interview “Read an advertisement. Visual Reading comprehension
 Comprehension test 30 30 test 30
 Comprehension test

 Language Structures and Language Structures and Language Structures and
 Conventions in context 20 Conventions in context 20 20
 Conventions in context

 Record a dialogue 30 Record an advertisement 30 Record a humorous story 30

 Total 100 Total 100 Total 100

SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6
 48
 TERM 4

 Task 1 % Task 1 % Task 1 %

 49
 Information text with visuals Information texts with visuals Information text

 Observe and discuss a Observe and discuss an Observe and discuss a signed
 magazine /news item 25 information text with visuals 20 information text 20

 Language Structures and Language Structures and Language Structures and
 Conventions taken from an Conventions taken from text Conventions taken from a text
 advertisement

 15 15 20

 “Read” a signed news / “Read” an information text with “Read” an information text
 magazine item and reflect 35 visuals and reflects on text 35 and reflect on text read 30
 independently “read” independently independently

 Record a news/magazine item Record an information text with Record a short summary
 25 visuals 30 30

 Total 100 Total 100 Total 100

 Task 2 (End of the year Task 2 (End of the year Task 2 (End of the year
 % % %
 examination) examination) examination)

 Paper 1: Paper 1: Paper 1:
 30 30 30
 Observing and Signing Observing and Signing Observing and Signing

 Paper 2 (1 hour): 25 Paper 2 (1 hour): 25 Paper 2 (1 hour):

 Visual Reading comprehension Visual Reading comprehension Visual Reading comprehension 40

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Language in context 15 Language in context 15 Language in context

 Paper 3 (1 hour): Paper 3 (1 hour): Paper 3 (1 hour):
 30 30 30
 Recording Recording Recording

 Total 100 Total 100 Total 100
 School Based Assessment and Examinations Grade 4-5

 Programme of Assessment
 SBA per Term
 Term 1: Term 2: Term 3: Term 4:

 1 Task
 2 Tasks 2 Tasks 1 Task
 +

 1 Mid-year examination

 comprising:

 SBA 2 Papers:

 Paper 1: Observing and
 75%
 Signing

 Paper 2 (2 hours):
 Integrated Paper
 (Comprehension,
 language and
 recording – essays and
 transactional texts)
 1 End of year
 examination comprising:

 2 Papers:

 Paper 1: Observing and
 EXAMINATIONS Signing

 25% Paper 2 (2 hours):
 Integrated Paper
 (Comprehension,
 language and
 Recording – essays and
 transactional texts)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 50
 School Based Assessment and Examinations Grade 4-5

 Programme of Assessment
 SBA per Term
 Term 1: 1 Task Term 3: Term 4:

 +
 2 Tasks 2 Tasks 1 Task
 1 Mid-year examination
 comprising:

 3 Papers:
 SBA Paper 1: Observing and
 Signing
 75%
 Paper 2 (1 hour):
 Recording – Essays and
 transactional text

 Paper 3 (1 hour):
 Comprehension and
 language
 1 End of year
 examination comprising:

 3 Papers:

 Paper 1:
 EXAMINATIONS Observing and Signing

 Paper 2 (1 hour):
 25%
 Recording – Essays and
 transactional text

 Paper 3 (1 hour):
 Comprehension and
 language

 51 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 FORMAT OF EXAMINATION PAPERS FOR GRADES 4-6

GRADES 4-5

The suggested outline for the midyear and end-of-year examination papers for the Home Languages in Grades 4-5

is as follows:

 PAPER DESCRIPTION %: GR.4 & 5
 1 Observing and Signing: 30
 Visual Reading comprehension 25

 2 Language in context 15

 (2 hours) Recording – essays and 20

 Transactional texts 10
 TOTAL FOR EXAM 100

GRADE 6

 PAPER DESCRIPTION %: GR.6
 1 Observing and Signing 30

 2 Recording – essays and 20

 (1 hour) Transactional texts 10
 3 Visual Reading comprehension 25

 (1 hour) Language in context 15
 TOTAL FOR EXAM 100

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 52
 Suggested format for each of the examination papers for Grade 4-5

PAPER SECTION %
 Observing and Signing GR4 GR5
 Observing and Signing: Prepared presentations / unprepared
 1 presentations / conversation / interview / debate / dramatization / role- 30 30
 play / discussions / comprehension
 TOTAL FOR PAPER 1 30 30
 Language in context GR4 GR5
 A : Comprehension
 25 25
 (A range of texts can be used including visual or graphic texts)
 B : Language

 • Language structures should be assessed in context using a variety
 of texts 15 15

 • Critical language awareness
 Recording GR4 GR5
 2 A : One Essay

 (2 hours) 20 20
 Grade 4-6: narrative / descriptive (Please note that the length of
 paragraphs for the different Grades are specified)
 B: One text - transactional text

 Formal & informal messages / request, complaint, sympathy, invitation,
 thanks, congratulations/ 10 10

 News items / Reports (formal & informal) / Reviews / Formal & informal
 “speeches” / Interviews / Dialogues
 TOTAL FOR PAPER 2 70 70
 OVERALL TOTAL 100 100

 53 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Suggested format for each of the examination papers for Grade 6

 PAPER SECTION %
 1 Observing and Signing
 Observing and Signing: Prepared presentations / unprepared presentations 30
 / conversation /

 interview / debate / dramatization / role-play / discussions / comprehension
 TOTAL FOR PAPER 1 30
 2 Language in context
 A : Comprehension 25
 (1 hour)
 (A range of texts can be used including visual or graphic texts)
 B : Language 15

 • Language structures should be assessed in context using a variety of
 texts

 • Critical language awareness
 TOTAL FOR PAPER 2 35
 3 Recording
 A : One Essay 20

 (1 hour) Grade 4-6: narrative / descriptive (Please note that the length of texts for the
 different Grades are specified under 3.3.2 of this document)
 B: One text- Longer transactional text 10

 Formal & informal messages / request, complaint, sympathy, invitation,
 thanks, congratulations/

 News items / Reports (formal & informal) / Reviews / Formal & informal
 “speeches” / Interviews / Dialogues (Please note that the length of texts for
 the different Grades are specified under 3.3.2 of this document)
 TOTAL FOR PAPER 3 35
 OVERALL TOTAL 100

4.5 RECORDING AND REPORTING

Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment
task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in the Curriculum and
Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual
progression within a grade and his or her readiness to progress or be promoted to the next grade. Records of learner
performance should also be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners in the teaching and learning
process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other stakeholders.
Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’ meetings, school
visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls/SMSs, emails, letters, class or school newsletters.
Teachers in all grades report in percentages against the subject. Seven levels of competence have been described
for each subject listed for Grades R-12. The various achievement levels and their corresponding percentage bands
are as shown in the table below.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 54
 CODES AND PERCENTAGES FOR RECORDING AND REPORTING

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE
 7 Outstanding achievement 80 – 100
 6 Meritorious achievement 70 – 79
 5 Substantial achievement 60 – 69
 4 Adequate achievement 50 – 59
 3 Moderate achievement 40 – 49
 2 Elementary achievement 30 – 39
 1 Not achieved 0 – 29

Note: The seven-point scale should have clear descriptors that give detailed information for each level.

Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages against the
subject on the learners’ report cards.

4.6 MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT TASKS

Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should
be implemented at school, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation practices must
be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments. This should be done at least once per term.

Moderation should ensure that all assessments are valid, fair, reliable and sufficient. Validity means that the task
should measure the attainment of skills that were taught in line with the skills indicated in the CAPS document.
The task must measure the level of achievement of specific skills. In setting comprehension questions for example,
the learners’ ability to analyse and synthesize information given in a signed text and not to ask questions about
general knowledge related to the text should be tested.

Moderators at school level must give quality comments based on the requirements above to ensure that the
assessment practice at school is enhanced. Moderation cannot simply be a monitoring exercise to check that the
number of tasks has been done or that a memorandum has been applied correctly. In SASL it means that the
moderator will give good comments, among other things, on the levels of questioning in comprehension testing;
the frequency of extended recording; the quality of assessment instruments and the developmental opportunities
afforded and the teacher’s engagement with learners’ recorded work as evidence of performance.

The moderation process must also ensure that the ratings given are consistent across all classes in the grade, and
all grades in the phase. For example, a rating of 3 given by one teacher should represent the same level of skill and
knowledge as the same rating given by another teacher. It is therefore important for Subject Heads to do internal
moderation regularly.

4.7 GENERAL
This document should be read in conjunction with:

4.7.1 National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R-12; and

4.7.2 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12.

4.7.3 Guidelines for Responding to learner Diversity in the Classroom Grades R – 12.

 55 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GLOSSARY
adjectives – adjectives can express some feature or quality of a noun; they can come before or after the
noun or be incorporated into the noun; they are often formed by non-manual modification (see non-manual
modification)

adverbs – adverbs are used to add in information about an event or situation such as its time, manner,
frequency or place; they are often formed by non-manual modification (see non-manual modification)

alliteration - repetition of parameters

ambiguity - possible double or even multiple meanings of certain signs and expressions; open to two or
more interpretations; or often intended to mislead; vague and unclear or not giving a straight answer

analogy - finding similarities in things that are usually seen as different, a way of explaining or illustrating
something, but not a proof

anticlimax – when an expectation of some high point of importance or excitement is not fulfilled or the
seriousness of a literary plot is suddenly lost as a result of a comical, digressive or meaningless event

attention getting strategies – appropriate way of attracting the attention of and Deaf person, e.g. tapping
on the shoulder, switch lights on and off

audience - the intended viewers of a particular text

author – the signer who produces a recorded text; often referred to as author/signer in this document

bias – a tendency to favour one thing, idea, attitude or person over another which makes it difficult to make
a fair assessment

body language – non-verbal communication consisting of body posture, gestures, facial expressions and
eye movement

chunking (paragraphing) - way of dividing up signed text

classifier – productive morpheme that represents the visual appearance, placement, movement and/or
handling or objects and animate beings; classifiers do not occur in isolation but must be used with a noun
referent; can be inflected to show pluralisation, position and verb movement

climax – the most exciting, effective or important part of the story; this important part is not necessarily at
the end

coherence – the underlying logical relationship which links ideas together and gives a chunk unity

cohesion – the linking of sentences or chunks by means of logical connectors such as conjunctions,
pronouns or repetition

collocation – the way that signs tend to group together, e.g. TEA, DRINK, CUP

colloquialism (see also slang) – language belonging to ordinary or familiar conversation but not
used in formal language, often including slang; this may include vocabulary and expressions acceptable
among friends, colleagues or in a close working group; colloquialisms may be inappropriate in formal
communications but are appropriate in some settings and can help to build rapport

compound signs - Compounds are a combination of 2 free morphemes that make a new sign with a
different but related meaning, e.g. PARENTS is a compound of the 2 free morphemes MOTHER and
FATHER

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 56
 conditional - Expresses ‘IF’ – ‘then’ relationships between 2 sentences, e.g RAIN (NMF) THERE,
UMBRELLA NONE, YOU WET

connotation / connotative meaning (see also denotative meaning) - both the positive and negative
associations that a word collects through usage that go beyond the literal (primary) meaning

constructed action – a discourse strategy used widely in sign languages in which the signer uses various
parts of their body – such as the head, torso, hands, eye-gaze and other non-manual cues – to depict the
actions, utterances, thought, feelings and/or attitudes of the character; also known as roleshift

context – a text is always used and produced in a context; the context includes the broad and the immediate
situation including aspects such as the social, cultural and political background, the term can also refer to
that which precedes or follows a sign or text and is essential to its meaning

contextual clues – meaning given in the context

denotation / denotative meaning (see also connotative meaning) – the literal or primary meaning of
a sign

dialect or regional variation – a variation of a language which includes different vocabulary and
expressions; dialect usually refers to signing characteristic of a particular region but can also be used
more broadly to refer to other types of variants in signing

discourse – longer pieces of text beyond the sentence level

eye gaze – using eyes to index the referent

facial expression – it is the overall configuration of the facial features, including the brows, eye-aperture,
nose, cheeks and mouth

figures of speech/figurative language - signs used in a non-literal way to create a desired effect; literary
texts often make concentrated use of figurative language (e.g. simile, personification, metaphor)

fingerspelling – manual representation of the alphabet of a written language; one-to one relationship
between the letters of the spoken language and the handshape

genre - the types or categories into which signed texts are grouped, e.g. longer stories, drama, poetry

gesture – movement of the hands, face or body which communicates specific messages (e.g. nodding of
head to indicate agreement)

glossing – a way of representing signs and non-manual features in printed words

handshape – this is the parameter that refers to the shape of the hands in its onset; form adopted by the
hand depending on the position of the fingers

higher order questions – these are questions that go beyond basic skills and require critical thinking
including analysis, synthesis and evaluation

iconicity – iconic signs look like the objects they represent; some aspects of the object or action is copied
in the sign, which makes the meaning transparent; visual equivalent of onomatopoeia

indexing – pointing to someone, something or to a particular location with the index finger (referent –
people, objects, events which are initially located in the signing space and thereafter referred to by pointing)

imperative form – a command, warning or advice

infer and deduce – to pick up meaning behind what is stated and to deduce all the implications; to use the
information in the signed text to work out something that is not directly stated in the signed text

 57 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 jargon – special terms or expressions used in a trade or profession or by any specific group, e.g. computer
or medical terminology

loan signs – signs borrowed from other sign languages as opposed to the indigenous/ native signs

location – this is the parameter that refers to where the sign is articulated, either on the body or the signing
space

metaphor – using one thing to describe another thing which has similar qualities (e.g. ‘Education is the
key to success’)

mode – a method, a way or manner in which something is presented; a way of communicating (e.g. the
signing mode, and the visual mode (which includes graphic forms such as charts); information can be
changed from one mode to another (e.g. converting a graph into a chunk)

mood – atmosphere or emotion in signed texts; it shows the feeling or the frame of mind of the characters;
also refers to the atmosphere produced by visual or multi-media text

movement – this is the parameter that the direction, speed, repetition and manner are important in
conveying the meaning in signing

narrative – a signed account of connected events in order of occurrence, a story

non-manual features – tthese actions are produced by any part of the body, from the waist up, other than
the hands; carry grammatical meaning using movements of the eyes, eyebrows, head, or shoulders and
various kinds of facial expressions and of lip, cheek, and tongue movement; no English equivalent

non-manual modification - non-manual modifiers consist of the various facial expressions, head tilting,
shoulder raising, mouthing, and similar NMFs that are added to hand signs to create meaning, and are
often necessary to properly form words. Non-manual modifiers are typically adjectival or adverbial. For
example, the adverb “th,” the tongue being placed between the teeth, means “carelessly” or “lazily” when
combined with a verb

non-mirroring – when you are signing you use your perspective (non-mirroring); if you are facing a
Deaf person and giving them directions and you ask them to turn right you will sign to your right - the
Deaf person facing you will understand that you are signing from your perspective which is the opposite
of theirs

notation system – a number of different systems developed for representing sign languages in written
form, e.g. Stokoe notation, HamNoSys (Hamburg notation system), SignWriting

numeral incorporation – incorporating the hand configurations found in numeral signs into numeral
incorporating signs, e.g. ONE WEEK, TWO WEEKS, THREE WEEKS

open-ended questions – it cannot be answered with a simple yes or no or a specific piece of information
and it gives the person answering the question scope to give the information that seems to them to be
appropriate; this is opposed to a closed-ended question which is a question format that limits respondents
with a list of answer choices from which they must choose, e.g. multiple choice, yes/no and forced alternate
questions

orientation – this is the parameter that describes the direction of the palm and/or fingertips during the
production of the sign

paraphrase – a restatement of an idea or text in one’s own signs

parameters – these are the five characteristics or basic parts of a sign, namely handshape, location, palm
orientation, movement, non-manual features

personification – attributing human characteristics to non-human things

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 58
 phonological awareness – children’s awareness of the phonological structure of sign language i.e.
parameters; phonemes are the smallest building blocks of a language; sounds in spoken language vs
parameters in sign language

proform – refers to classifiers and indicates any form that stands in the place of, and does the job of,
another form/whole entity, e.g. people, animals and objects

pronoun - a form that stands in the place of, and does the job of, a noun. Pronouns include personal
pronouns such as `I` and `you` and possessive pronouns such as `my` and `your`

register - the use of different signs, style, grammar, signing mode for different contexts, situations,
relationships and familiarity between language users

rhetorical question – this is not a request for information or an answer; the signer answers the question
in the next sentence; a rhetorical question serves the purpose of backgrounding certain information (in
the rhetorical question) and highlighting other information (in the focused phrase), all of which is done for
conveying information in a conversation

roleshift – signers take on the role of two or more characters, with the direction of the body and eye-gaze
allowing not only a shift in roles but also a shift in who is being addressed (also see constructed action)

SASL conventions – norms appropriate to SASL discourse dependent on the genre and context; accepted
practices or rules in the use of SASL

semantics – meaning of signs

signing mode - it is the equivalent to tone in spoken language; the emotion of the signer as conveyed by
pace of utterance, size of signing and NMF; in the context of this qualification also means announcement,
articulation, choice of signs, explanation, statement, turn of phrase, presenting

sign size – appropriate for the audience, context and genre, e.g. large signing would apply to younger
children, large audiences and large venues

SignWriting – a writing system which uses visual symbols to represent the handshapes, movements and
facial expressions of signed languages; an example of a notation system (see also notation system)

slang – informal language often used by a group of people, such as teenagers; the difference between
colloquial language and slang is that slang has not yet been accepted in polite or formal conversation,
whereas colloquialisms have been accepted

stereotype – a fixed conventional view of about what role a particular person is expected to play

style – the distinct and unique manner in which a signer arranges signs to achieve particular effects;
combines the idea to be expressed with the individuality of the signer; includes individual sign choices and
signing mode

syntax– also known as grammar; major sign categories i.e. lexical and parts of speech

vlog - video diary as opposed to a blog (written page)

 59 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Note

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 60
 Note

61 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Note

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 62
 Note

63 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Note

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE INTERMEDIATE PHASE | Grades 4 - 6 64