CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
 GRADES 4-6

 FRENCH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE
 Department of Basic Education
222 Struben Street
Private Bag X895
Pretoria 0001
South Africa
Tel.: +27 12 357 3000
Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street
Private Bag X9023
Cape Town 8000
South Africa
Tel.: +27 21 465 1701
Fax: +27 21 461 8110
Website: http://www.education.gov.za

© 2017 Department of Basic Education

ISBN: 978-1-4315-2690-1

 2
 CONTENTS PAGE
SECTION 1 Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement 4
1.1 Background 4
1.2 Overview 4
1.3 General aims of the South African curriculum 5
1.4 Time allocation 6
 1.4.1 Foundation Phase 6
 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase 7
 1.4.3 Senior Phase 7
 1.4.4 Grades 10–12 8
SECTION 2 Introducing the Languages 9
2.1 Languages in the National Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement 9
2.1.1 Language levels 9
2.1.2 The language skills 11
2.1.3 Language teaching approaches 14
2.2 Time allocation of Second Additional Language in the curriculum 15
2.3 Learning and Teaching Support Materials 16
SECTION 3 Content and Teaching Plans for Language Skills 17
3.1 Overview of Skills, Content and Strategies 17
3.2 Expressions used in conversational French – reference list 22
3.3 Spread of texts across Grades 4 – 6 24
3.3.1 Summary of text types across the phase 26
3.3.2 Length of texts for Second Additional Language (to be produced by the learner) 29
3.3.3 Length of texts for Second Additional Language (for learners to engage with) 29
3.3.4 Vocabulary to be attained by Second Additional Language learners 30
3.4 Teaching plans 30
3.4.1 How texts link together in the two-week cycle 30
3.4.2 How the texts/activities are sequenced across the two-week cycle 30
3.4.3 The type of texts prescribed and recommended 31
3.4.4 Number of key texts in a two-week cycle 31
3.4.5 How the Language Structures and Conventions are addressed 31
3.5 Content and Teaching Plans for French 32
3.5.1 Grade 4 32
3.5.2 Grade 5 49
3.5.3 Grade 6 66
SECTION 4 Assessment in Second Additional Language 89
4.1 Introduction 89
4.2 Informal or daily assessment 89
4.3 Formal assessment 90
4.4 Programme of Assessment 93
 4.4.1 Overview of requirements 93
 4.4.2 Examinations 93
4.5 Recording and reporting 94
4.6 Moderation of assessment 95
4.7 General 95
Glossary 96

 3
 SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND
ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
1.1 BACKGROUND
The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the
schooling sector.
To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming into
effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was developed for each
subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines in
Grades R-12.

1.2 OVERVIEW
(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for learning and
 teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12 (January 2012).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) replaces the two current national curricula
 statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of 31 May 2002,
 and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6 October 2003 and
 No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii) comprise the following policy
 documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January
 2012) during the period 2012-2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment
 Guidelines for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the General
 Education and Training Band, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in Government Gazette No.
 29626 of 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette No.27819 of 20 July 2005;

 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special
 needs published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy
 document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 4
 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol
 for Assessment (Grades R-12), promulgated in Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette No.
 29467 of 11 December 2006.=

(d) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy as
 contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South African Schools Act,
 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to determine minimum outcomes
 and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the assessment of learner achievement to be
 applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 GENERAL AIMS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN CURRICULUM
(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values worth
 learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply knowledge
 and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes knowledge in
 local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 serves the purposes of:

 • equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability or
 intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment, and meaningful
 participation in society as citizens of a free country;

 • providing access to higher education;

 • facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and

 • providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is based on the following principles:

 • Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that equal
 educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;

 • Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than rote and
 uncritical learning of given truths;

 • High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at each
 grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;

 • Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

 • Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices of social and
 environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is sensitive to issues of diversity such as poverty, inequality,
 race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;

 • Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country as
 important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

 5
 • Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and depth to
 those of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

 • identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;

 • work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

 • organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;

 • collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

 • communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;

 • use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the environment and the
 health of others; and

 • demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem solving
 contexts do not exist in isolation.

(e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This can
 only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to learning,
 and how to plan for diversity.

 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant support
 structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based Support Teams, Institutional-Level
 Support Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers in the classroom,
 teachers should use various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those included in the Department of
 Basic Education’s Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

1.4 TIME ALLOCATION
1.4.1 Foundation Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 GRADE R GRADES 1-2 GRADE 3
 SUBJECT
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)

Home Language 10 8/7 8/7

First Additional Language 2/3 3/4

Mathematics 7 7 7

Life Skills 6 6 7

Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)
Creative Arts (2) (2) (2)
Physical Education
 (2) (2) (2)
Personal and Social Well-being
 (1) (1) (1)

 6
 TOTAL 23 23 25

(b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8 hours and a
 minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and a maximum of 3 hours for
 Additional Language in Grades 1-2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated
 for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

(d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R - 2 and 2 hours as indicated by the hours in
 brackets for Grade 3.

1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS

 Home Language 6

 First Additional Language 5

 Mathematics 6

 Natural Sciences and Technology 3,5

 Social Sciences 3

 Life Skills 4

 Creative Arts (1,5)
 Physical Education (1)
 Personal and Social Well-being
 (1,5)

 TOTAL 27,5

1.4.3 Senior Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS

 Home Language 5

 First Additional Language 4

 7
 Mathematics 4,5

 Natural Sciences 3

 Social Sciences 3

 Technology 2

 Economic Management Sciences 2

 Life Orientation 2

 Creative Arts 2

 TOTAL 27,5

1.4.4 Grades 10-12

(a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)

 Home Language 4.5

 First Additional Language 4.5

 Mathematics 4.5

 Life Orientation 2

 12 (3x4h)
 A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group B
 Annexure B, Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National policy
 pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, subject to the
 provisos stipulated in paragraph 28 of the said policy document.

 TOTAL 27,5

 The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified above,
 and may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish to
 offer additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

 8
 SECTION 2: INTRODUCING THE SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE
IN THE INTERMEDIATE PHASE
2.1 LANGUAGES IN THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
Language is a tool for thought and communication. It is also a cultural and aesthetic means commonly shared among
a people to make better sense of the world they live in. Learning to use language effectively enables learners to
acquire knowledge, to express their identity, feelings and ideas, to interact with others, and to manage their world. It
also provides learners with a rich, powerful and deeply rooted set of images and ideas that can be used to make their
world other than it is; better than it is; clearer than it is. It is through language that cultural diversity and social relations
are expressed and constructed, and it is through language that such constructions can be altered, broadened and
refined.

2.1.1 Language levels

Language learning in the Intermediate Phase includes all the official languages in South Africa, namely, Afrikaans,
English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa, isiZulu, Sepedi (Sesotho sa Leboa), Sesotho, Setswana, Siswati, Tshivenda, Xitsonga
and non-official languages, namely, Arabic, French, German, Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Latin, Modern Greek,
Portuguese, Spanish, Tamil, Telugu, Urdu. All official languages can be offered at Home, First Additional, or Second
Additional Language levels. All non-official languages are offered on at least Second Additional Language level.

Language learning in Grades 4 - 9 includes all the official languages in South Africa. All these official languages can
be offered at Home, First Additional, or Second Additional Language levels. Non-official languages may be offered on
at least Second Additional Language level where such languages have been developed.

The Home Language is the language first acquired by learners while First Additional language is the language learnt
in addition to one’s home language. The Second Additional Language is the further language that a learner can learn,
that enables broader communication and promotes multilingualism as enshrined in the Constitution and the Language
in Education Policy. The language may be in use within the community or culture and will enhance nation building and
intercultural understanding. Many South African schools do not offer the home languages of some or all of the enrolled
learners but rather have one or two languages offered at home language level. As a result, the names Home
Language, First Additional and Second Additional Language refer to the proficiency levels at which the language is
offered, and not the native (Home) or acquired (as in the Additional) languages. For the purposes of this policy, any
reference to Home Language should be understood to refer to the level and not the language itself.

The Home Language level provides for language proficiency that reflects the mastery of basic interpersonal
communication skills required in social situations and the cognitive academic skills essential for learning across the
curriculum. Emphasis is placed on the teaching of the listening, speaking, Reading and Writing skills at this language
level. This level also provides learners with a literary, aesthetic and imaginative ability that will provide them with the
ability to recreate, imagine, and empower their understandings of the world they live in. However, the emphasis and
marks allocated for Reading and Writing from Grades 7 onwards are greater than that for speaking and listening
because the demands on learners’ literacy increase as they prepare for further and higher education and the world of
work.

The First Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge of the language
when they arrive at school. The focus in the first few years of school is on developing learners’ ability to understand
and speak the language - basic interpersonal communication skills. In Grades 2 and 3 learners start to build literacy
on this oral foundation. They also apply the literacy skills they have already learned in their Home Language.

In the Intermediate and Senior Phases, learners continue to strengthen their listening, speaking, Reading and Writing

 9
 skills. At this stage the majority of children are learning through the medium of their First Additional Language,
English, and should be getting more exposure to it. Greater emphasis is therefore given to using the First Additional
Language for the purposes of thinking and reasoning. This enables learners to develop their cognitive academic skills,
which they need to study subjects like Science in English. They also engage more with literary texts and begin to
develop aesthetic and imaginative ability in their Additional Language.

By the time learners enter Grade 7, they should be reasonably proficient in their First Additional Language with regard
to both interpersonal and cognitive academic skills. However, the reality is that many learners still cannot
communicate well in their Additional Language at this stage. The challenge in Grades 4-6, therefore, is to provide
support for these learners at the same time as providing a curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards
required in further grades. These standards must be such that learners can use their additional language at a high
level of proficiency to prepare them for further or higher education or the world of work.

The Second Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge of the
language when they arrive at school. The focus upon exposure to Second Additional Language is on developing
learners’ ability to understand and speak the language - basic interpersonal communication skills. In Grades 4 - 6
learners start to build their oral and literacy skills. They also apply the oral and literacy skills they have already learned
in their Home and First Additional Languages.

In Grades 7-9, learners will continue to strengthen their Listening and Speaking while developing their Reading and
Writing skills.

By the time learners enter Grade 7, they should try to communicate in their Second Additional Language at both
interpersonal and social levels. However, the reality is that many learners still cannot communicate well in their
Additional Language at this stage. The challenge in Grades 4-6, therefore, is to provide support for these learners at
the same time as providing a curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards required in further grades. These
standards must be such that learners can use their additional language at a level of proficiency to prepare them for
further or higher education or the world of work.

2.1.1.1 Specific aims of learning Second Additional Languages

Learning a Second Additional Language should enable learners to:

acquire the language skills necessary to communicate appropriately in the target language at a basic level;

listen, speak, read/view and write the language with growing confidence and enjoyment. These skills and attitudes
 form the basis for life-long learning;

express, orally and in writing, and emotions in order to become comfortable in the language;

use language and their imagination to find out more about themselves and the different cultures and the world around
 them. This will enable them to express their experiences and findings about the world orally and in writing;

use language to access and manage communication in other contexts. Information literacy is a vital skill in the
 ‘information age’ and forms the basis for lifelong learning;

use language as a means for expressing information on familiar topics; for interacting with a familiar range of texts;
 and for reading texts for enjoyment, basic information and communication.

2.1.1.2 Teaching the Second Additional Language

In order to learn an Additional Language well, one needs as much exposure to it as possible in order to build linguistic
competence and basic discourse competence. Teachers should therefore ensure that learners listen to and read the
Additional Language in the time allocated for various purposes. The learners need opportunities to listen to the
Additional Language for information and comprehension (e.g. a dialogue) and for pleasure (e.g. a song). Even more

 10
 importantly, they need opportunities to read and view the Additional Language for information (e.g. instructions to
make a sandwich), pleasure (e.g. a simple story). Research shows that the best way to develop a wide vocabulary is
through reading of appropriate texts. It is very important that oral, written and visual texts are at the right level for
learners. If the texts are too difficult, learners will get discouraged and they will not learn anything; if they are too easy,
there will be no challenge and little learning will take place. An important role of the language teacher is to match the
level of text to the level of the learner. Throughout the Intermediate Phase, learners should be listening to and reading
texts that are in line with their developing language skills.

Learners also need to use their Additional Language as often as possible. They need opportunities to listen, speak,
read and, to a lesser extent, write the Additional Language for interpersonal reasons (e.g. a dialogue), to develop their
creativity (e.g. performing a song, role playing, etc.), to develop communicative skills (e.g. expressing an opinion,
meeting and greeting).

Learners need to understand the purpose for which they are speaking. Throughout the Intermediate Phase, learners
should be doing oral exercises that are in line with their developing language skills. It is necessary that learners get
regular and timely feedback on their orals so that they know where and how to improve. An important role of a
language teacher is to provide high quality feedback, which is at the heart of good assessment.

Learners also need to know the basics of language: grammar, vocabulary, spelling and punctuation. Generally,
teachers will deal with these aspects of language in context. For example, they can make learners aware of the
structure and features used in giving directions (commands are used). There is also a place for direct/explicit teaching
of the basics and the opportunity to practise them.

When planning a two-week unit of lessons, teachers should integrate language skills, together with the basics of
language. They should choose a text type and a topic / theme that will interest learners; little learning can be achieved
if learners are not engaged and motivated. For example, a topic for phrases / sentences might be ‘My school’.
Teachers could introduce the topic through listening and/or reading, building the language and vocabulary knowledge
necessary for speaking. For example, learners could read a short text presenting the vocabulary and language
structures. Once learners are familiar with the language necessary for this topic, they could then write the phrase /
sentence. This would provide further opportunities for working with language. Teachers should provide feedback
throughout the process and administer an appropriate assessment activity at the end.

In Grades 4 - 6, it is important that:

There is a strong focus on Listening and Speaking

There is continued support for the development of vocabulary, sentence and paragraph construction, and grammar in
 context

Learners work with a variety of texts, including visual texts. These texts increase in difficulty as they move through the
 grades

2.1.2 THE LANGUAGE SKILLS
The Second Additional Language curriculum is packaged according to the following skills:

 1 Listening and Speaking

 2 Reading and Viewing

 3 Writing and Presenting

 11
 4 Language Structures and Conventions

Listening and Speaking

Listening and Speaking are central to learning in all subjects. Through effective Listening and Speaking strategies,
learners collect and synthesise information, construct knowledge, solve problems, and express ideas and opinions. In
Grades 4 - 6, Second Additional Language learners will use Listening and Speaking skills to communicate at a
basic level.

In this phase, learners’ spoken language still needs to be scaffolded (i.e. modelled and supported, for example, with
vocabulary and sentence frames). The teacher needs to make sure that all learners get opportunities to speak in the
target language. Because learners will progress at a different pace, the teacher needs to tailor speaking opportunities
(e.g. the questions asked) to the level of the individual child. As the children move through the grades, the teacher
should expect children to speak more and their utterances should become longer.

Teaching time should include daily practice of short Listening and Speaking activities as well as longer focused
activities spread out through the week.

In Grades 4- 6, teachers should approach listening as a three-phase activity:

Pre-listening: This prepares learners for listening to an oral text in their Additional Language. For example, the
 teacher could use a visual text and ask a general, focusing question in advance which the learners must answer
 after they have listened to the text for the first time.

During listening: It is good practice for the teacher to read (or play) a listening text several times, asking different
 questions each time. It is helpful to move from questions which enable learners to understand the general
 meaning of the text, to more specific questions that require a more detailed understanding of the text. By doing
 this, the teacher is helping learners to develop listening strategies.

Post listening: Learners answer further questions, review notes, use information (e.g. to label a picture).

Speaking happens informally in the classroom, for example, in group work. Learners also need opportunities to
practise the kind of informal conversations they might not normally have in the classroom. Teachers should provide
instruction in formal speaking and presenting, for example, a prepared, reading aloud, etc. This will often be a two-
step process:

Planning and organising ideas and information

Practising and presenting: demonstrating an awareness of audience and context; the use of appropriate and accurate
 Language Structures and Conventions; clear delivery; use of appropriate verbal and non-verbal techniques, etc.

Reading and Viewing

Reading and viewing skills are central to successful learning across the curriculum, as well as for full participation in
society, the world of work and the global context. Learners develop reading and viewing skills of a familiar range of
texts, including visual texts, for information.

If necessary, use shared reading at the beginning of Grade 4 to guide learners into this phase. This method can be
used from time to time if sufficient books at this level are available. This could be alternated with storytelling. If books
at this level are not available, then use texts from a textbook or reader/s. Use also methods such as Reading with and
Reading to the whole class.

Use guided group reading and independent/pair reading methods and gradually get learners to do more and more
independent reading. The independent reading stipulated in the teaching plans must be accommodated within the

 12
 time allocated for reading. Encourage learners to do independent reading in any spare time that they have.

Set basic comprehension activities to ensure that learners understand what they read.

The reading process

The introduction of the reading process consists of the pre-reading, reading and post reading stages. Activities that
the Teacher will assist the learner in can be summarised as follows:

Pre-reading:

Activating prior knowledge and making connections.

Looking at the source, author, publication date and type of text.

Browsing through the first paragraph of a section - formulating expectancies.

Reading:

Pause occasionally to check comprehension and to let the ideas sink in

Use the context to work out the meaning of unknown words as much as is possible; where this is not possible, use a
 dictionary

Visualise what is being read

Continue reading even if parts are not always clearly understood.

Reread a section if it is not understood at all. Read confusing sections aloud, at a slower pace, or both.

Ask someone to help for understanding a difficult section

Add reading marks and annotate key points

Reflect on what is being read

Post reading:

When the need arises to recall specific information, outline key ideas and a few supporting details

Write key words to help clarifying and recalling main ideas.

Think about new questions on the topic

Understanding - confirm the understanding of the text

Extend thinking - use ideas that are seen in the text

Writing and presenting

Writing is a powerful instrument of communication that allows learners to construct and communicate thoughts and
ideas coherently. Frequent writing practice across a variety of familiar contexts, tasks and subjects enables learners to
communicate functionally and creatively. The aim is to introduce writing skills to develop and present appropriate
written texts. In the Intermediate Phase, Second Additional Language learners will need careful support and
guidance to develop writing skills.

Writing is important because it forces learners to think about grammar and spelling. This encourages learners to
process the language, speeds up language acquisition and increases accuracy. Learners will learn to write a range of
familiar creative and informational texts, initially using writing frames as support and gradually learning to write
particular text types independently. They will also employ the writing process to produce well organised, grammatically
correct writing texts.

 13
 Process approach to writing

Writing and designing texts is a process which consists of the following stages:

Pre-writing / planning

Drafting

Revision, editing, proofreading

Presenting

Learners need an opportunity to put this process into practice and they should:

decide on the purpose and audience of a text to be written and/or designed;

brainstorm ideas using, for example, mind maps, flow charts or lists;

consult relevant sources, select relevant information and organise ideas;

produce a first draft which takes into account purpose, audience, topic and text structure

read drafts and get feedback from others (classmates or the teacher);

edit and proofread the draft; and

produce a neat, legible, edited final version.

Language Structures and Conventions

A good knowledge of vocabulary and grammar provides the foundation for skills development (listening, speaking,
Reading and Writing) in the Second Additional Language. Intermediate Phase learners will be introduced to language
structure and conventions in the target language.

Through interacting with a variety of familiar texts, learners extend their use of vocabulary and correctly apply
language structures. In the Intermediate Phase, Second Additional Language learners will take more notice of words
and grammatical structures they are already familiar with.

Learners will explore progressively how language is used. They will also be able to use this knowledge to experiment
with language to build meaning (from word and sentence levels to whole texts), and to see how a text and its context
are related.

It is expected that Language Structures and Conventions will be taught in context as other language skills are taught
and developed. However, in the Intermediate Phase time should be set aside for formal instruction and practice in
Language Structures and Conventions. The teaching plans contain a list of language items that should be covered in
each grade. These are listed at the beginning of each term. When selecting listening and reading texts for each two-
week cycle, make sure that they contain some of the language items that need to be covered that term. Create
activities related to these texts that will enable learners to use these items, in context. Similarly, the writing texts
learners will write will include some of the language items. Give learners guidance on appropriate and correct usage of
these items. Select some of the items that learners have difficulty with and give them formal practice (during the time
per week set aside for this).

2.1.3 Language teaching approaches

The approaches to teaching language in these documents are text-based, communicative, integrated and process
oriented.

The text-based approach and the communicative approach are both dependent on the continuous use and
production of texts.

 14
 A text-based approach teaches learners to become competent, confident and critical readers, writers, viewers, and
designers of texts. It involves listening to, reading, viewing, and understanding texts. Authentic texts are the main
source of content and context for the communicative, integrated learning and teaching of languages. The text-based
approach also involves producing different kinds of simple texts for particular purposes.

A communicative approach suggests that when learning a language a learner should have a great deal of exposure
to the target language and many opportunities to practise or produce the language. Learners learn to read by doing a
great deal of reading and learn to write by doing much writing.

The process approach is used when learners produce oral and written texts. The learners engage in different stages
of the listening, speaking, reading, and writing processes. They must think of the audience and the purpose during
these processes. This will enable them to communicate and express their thoughts in a natural way. For example, the
teaching of writing does not focus on the product only but also focuses on the purpose and process of writing. During
process writing, learners are taught how to generate ideas, to think about the purpose and audience, to write drafts, to
edit their work, and to present a written product that communicates their thoughts.

Approaches to teaching literature / working with texts

The main reason for reading literature / texts in the classroom is to create opportunities to apply learned language
skills. The teaching of literature / texts is never easy, but it is impossible without personal, thoughtful, and honest
interpretations and comments from the learners themselves. Unless they learn how to understand texts on their own,
they will not have learned much.

Ways to approach the teaching of literature would involve some or all of the following:

Make every attempt to read as much of the text in class as possible without breaking for any other activity. It is
 essential that learners have a clear idea of what is going on at the most basic level of the text. Read as many as
 possible in class, and ensure that learners read poems as well.

Writing activities that demand a basic understanding of the text being read can prove very helpful in raising language
 skills levels and raising appreciation of skills levels attained. Class discussions can be fruitful as long as
 everyone is involved and it leads to written work.

Finally, work with texts should be approached as a unit, a whole.

Following is a summary of the main text types encountered in the Intermediate Phase and the language structures
inherent in these text types. This information will assist in structuring activities on the different texts so that learners
can engage with these language structures. Select only a few language structures to give attention to each time when
teaching these text types.

2.2 TIME ALLOCATION
The recommended teaching time for Second Additional Language in the Intermediate Phase is 1.5 hours per
week. All language content is provided within a two-week cycle (3 hours). The following time allocation for the
different language skills is suggested.

 Skills Time Allocation per
 Time allocation per
 Two-Week Cycle %
 week (Hours)
 (Minutes)

 Listening & Speaking 1.5 75 40

 15
 Reading & Viewing: Comprehension &
 55 30
 Literature

 Writing & Presenting 35 20

 Language Structures and Conventions
 15 10
 (this is also integrated into the 4 skills)

 Total 180 (3 hours) 100

2.3 LEARNING AND TEACHING SUPPORT MATERIALS
Each learner should have:

 An approved language textbook

 A reader/readers containing the following genre / text types:

 Stories

 Poetry

 Information texts

 Social texts

 A dictionary or word list

 Access to a range of reading material to accommodate different reading levels e.g. a selection of readers with
 sufficient copies of texts at each level in a class and school.

 Texts for shared reading in Grade 4. These may be books or other enlarged texts or the prescribed textbook or
 readers.

The teacher should have:

 A Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement

 Language in Education Policy (LiEP)

 The language textbook used by learners and other textbooks for resource purposes in addition to the approved
 text

 A reader/readers containing the recommended genre / text types

 Dictionaries and reference books (monolingual, bilingual and multilingual dictionaries; thesaurus;
 encyclopaedia, a good grammar reference book, etc.)

 A Teacher’s Resource File/Book: this may be a file made up of materials collected by the teacher or a
 commercially published Teacher’s Guide

 Access to reading material in a class, school and/or public library in order to guide learners’ reading

 Audio/visual aids

 16
 SECTION 3: CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR LANGUAGE
SKILLS
3.1 OVERVIEW OF SKILLS, CONTENT AND STRATEGIES

The following is an overview of the content, skills and strategies to be found in the teaching plans.

Overview of content, skills and strategies table

 Skills Grades 4-6

 Content Strategies and sub-skills

 Listening comprehension
 Listening and Listening process
 Listening for information Pre-listening
 Speaking
 Pronunciation During listening
 Listening for enjoyment Listening comprehension
 Different forms of oral Recording main ideas by retelling,
 communication:
 explaining
 Conversation
 Listen to and respond to simple questions
 Directions / instructions /
 Post- listening
 procedures
 Story telling The speaking process
 Role-play Planning, researching and organising
 Group discussion Practising and presenting
 Short poems and rhymes Communication for social purposes
 Language games Simple conversations
 Personal / factual recounts Turn taking conventions

 Refer to Expressions used in Encouraging use of the additional language
 Ask and respond to questions.
 conversational French -
 Reference list Recount events
 Informal presentation of familiar event
 Correct format, vocabulary, language and conventions

 Reading and Recommended text types: Reading and viewing process:
 viewing Stories e.g. contemporary realistic
 Use pre-reading, reading and post reading process and strategies:
 fiction, traditional stories (myths
 To understand the text
 and legends, folk tales, fables),
 adventure stories, picture stories For close reading of the text (reading comprehension)
 with captions To demonstrate independent reading progressively (reading for
 Poetry /Song pleasure, information and learning)

 Introductory Information texts e.g. Introduce learners to :
 procedures, factual recounts, Text features - titles, illustrations, headings, subheadings,
 Social texts e.g. invitations, numbering, captions, headlines, format.
 greeting cards, letters Text structures - lists, sequential order, description, procedures,
 Media texts e.g. advertisements, main point and narrative sequence.
 notices, pamphlets Parts of a book - title page, table of contents, chapters, glossary,
 Visual texts: advertising (posters,

 17
 pamphlets, advertisements), etc.
 cartoon, comic strip, diagram / Reading and viewing strategies
 graph / table / charts / Rereading
 photographs / drawings
 Clarifying
 Comprehension paragraphs
 Drawing conclusions / own opinion
 Text for prepared reading aloud
 Visual Literacy - (a familiar range of graphic and visual texts e.g.
 Texts for information advertisements, notices, posters, comics, cartoons, photographs,
 pictures):
 Reading of literary texts

 Poetry/Song
 Literal meaning
 Message
 Sound devices e.g. rhyme, rhythm, punctuation, repetition

 Story
 Storyline
 Characters
 Setting

 Information and social texts
 Audience and purpose

 Prepared and unprepared reading (Reading aloud )
 Use of tone, voice projection, pace, eye contact, posture and
 gestures
 Pronounce words correctly

 Word writing e.g. lists
Writing and Process writing:
 Sentence writing
presenting Pre-writing/planning
 Paragraph writing
 Brainstorming of vocabulary and ideas in a group
 Text types Organise ideas
 Creative writing Drafting
 Descriptive e.g. descriptions of Word choice
 people, places, animals, plants,
 Structuring sentences
 objects, etc.
 General ideas
 Narrative e.g. stories, personal
 recounts Reads own writing

 Picture stories Gets feedback from teacher

 Simple Dialogues Revising, editing, proofreading and presenting
 Revises: improves content and structure of ideas
 Transactional writing (social,
 Refines word choice, sentence and paragraph structure
 functional, and information texts)
 Messages, greeting cards, Presents neat, legible final version
 invitations
 Posters, notices, advertisements
 Completing a simple form.

Language Working with words (Vocabulary development): use of dictionary, spelling, meaning, syllables, phonics,
Structures and synonyms, antonyms, homonyms, prefixes, suffixes
Conventions Working with sentences

 18
 Parts of speech, e.g. nouns, determiners, pronouns, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, connectors

 Sentence structure: simple, and complex sentences, command form, questions, statements,

 Verb tenses

 Concord: subject-verb concord

 Word order

 Negative forms

 Direct and indirect speech

 Language conventions

 Introduce simple language rules

 Punctuation

 Spelling

 Sounds

 Refer to Language Structures and Conventions - Reference list

Language Structures and Conventions - Reference list

The following language structures will be taught in the context of Reading and Writing, and also as part of a systematic
grammar programme. These structures need to be introduced progressively throughout the grades.

NB: The unique features of the language must be taken into consideration. As a result, only features applicable to a specific
language should be given attention in the text below.

Nouns / Noms Countable nouns, e.g. un livre/des livres
 Number (singular and plural) e.g. la chaise/les chaises ; le chapeau/les chapeaux
 Nouns with no change in spelling in the plural form e.g. le pays/les pays
 Gender (masculine and feminine) e.g. la fille/ le garçon; la peur/le problème
 Common (e.g. la femme) and proper nouns (e.g. Damien)
 Abstract nouns e.g. l'amour, la paix, le respect
 **Showing material e.g. Le complément du nom (en/de) + matière (un pain de savon, un pull en laine)
 **Showing use, capacity e.g. le complément du nom (à/de) - l'usage, la contenance (une boîte à bijoux,
 une barquette de fruits)
 Showing possession e.g. le complément du nom avec "de" - l'appartenance
 e.g. le pupitre de Lesego, les jouets des enfants
 Collective nouns : e.g. un groupe de pèlerins, un tas de pierres, une rangée de meubles, une série
 d’exercices

Determiners / Indefinite article: un livre, une pomme
déterminants Definite article: le livre, la chemise, les pommes
 Demonstrative adjectives: ce, cet, cette, ces.
 Demonstrative pronouns : celui-ci, celui-là, ceux-ci, ceux-là
 Partitive article : la quantité indéterminée: du / de la / des …
 L'article "zero" : être + profession e.g. Il est ingénieur
 Quantity 1 : la quantité déterminée e.g. un kilo de / beaucoup de
 Quantity 2: comparaison (e.g. moins de / autant de)

Pronouns / Personal pronouns as subject: je, tu, il/elle, nous, vous ils/elles e.g. Elle lit le roman.

 19
 pronoms Personal pronouns as direct or indirect object : pronoms COD et COI : me, te, nous, vous, le, la, les, lui,
 leur e.g. Elle me l'a donné.
 Reflexive pronouns: pronoms réfléchis : me, te, se, nous, vous, se e.g Il s’est lavé.
 Relative pronouns: pronoms relatifs : qui, que, (e.g. L'homme qui regarde par la fenêtre est mon
 professeur.)
 Interrogative pronouns: pronoms interrogatifs ; où, quand, combien (e.g. Quand allez-vous rentrer?)

Adjectives / Position of adjectives: place et accord des adjectifs e.g. le vieil homme, la vieille église, le chien
adjectifs intelligent
 Comparison of adjectives e.g. bon, meilleur, le meilleur/ la meilleure / les meilleurs / les meilleures ;
 intelligent(e), plus intelligent(e), le/la plus intelligent(e)
 e.g. C'était la journée la plus belle de ma vie.

Adverbs / Adverbs of manner e.g. tranquillement, poliment, doucement, vite
adverbes Adverbs of time e.g. hier, demain, ensuit, enfin, premièrement, maintenant, ce matin
 Adverbs of frequency e.g. toujours parfois, d'habitude, quelquefois, jamais, souvent
 Adverbs of probability e.g. certainement, absolument, peut-être, eventuellement
 Adverbs of duration e.g. toujours, encore, plus, pendant, depuis, dans, il y a
 Adverbs of degree e.g. très, trop, assez, complètement
 Adverbs of place e.g. près, loin, à côté, en face
 Adverbs of cause, consequence, opposition e.g. donc, puisque, comme, alors, pourtant

Prepositions / Place and direction e.g. au-dessous, au-dessus, sur, sous, à, entre, derrière
prépositions Adjective + preposition e.g. peur de, honte de, fâché contre, intéressé à
 Noun + preposition e.g. invitation à, décision de, raison pour, difficile de, facile à

Interjections Exclamations e.g. Ah ! Ben ! Ouf ! Bof ! Aie !
 La phrase exclamative : quel, que, comme… ! e.g. Quelle insolence!

Conjunctions / Coordinating conjunctions : e.g. mais, et, ou… ou…, soit…. soit….
Conjonctions

Verbs / verbes Transitive and intransitive verbs e.g. Il a acheté un stylo. / La jeune fille est partie.

Verb tenses / Simple present tense e.g. Je joue au tennis. / Les jeunes adorent les portraits numériques.
les temps Progressive present : être en train de + infinitive e.g. Elle est en train d'apprendre le français.
verbaux
 Present tense with DEPUIS e.g. J'habite à Durban depuis mon enfance.
 Expressing future time:
 Going to + infinitive (Futur proche) e.g. Ils vont voir leurs cousins./Je crois qu'Il va pleuvoir demain.
 La concordance des temps : l'antériorité, la simultanéité, la postériorité

Concord / Subject-verb concord e.g. Il vient d'arriver. / Je pars demain. / J'allais à l'école. / Ils allaient au travail.
accord

Modals / To express ability/inability e.g Il peut résoudre le problème.
modalisation To express permission e.g. Puis-je aller aux toilettes?
 To express instructions/requests: e.g. Pouvez-vous ouvrir la fenêtre, s'Il vous plaît?
 To express possibility/impossibility e.g. Cela peut causer des soucis. / Elle ne peut pas le savoir.
 To express probability/improbability e.g. devoir, pouvoir + infinitif / Nous devons arriver avant 22h00.

 20
 To express certainty e.g. Ils ont certainement dû oublier / Je suis certain de sa bonne foi/Je n'ai aucun
 doute.

Conditional First conditional to express a real possibility e.g. S'il pleut, nous n'allons pas à la piscine.
sentences / Second conditional to express something that is unlikely or improbable e.g. Si je gagnais au loto, j'irais sur
hypothèses la lune.
 Third conditional to express something that is hypothetical, regret e.g. Si j'avais étudié plus assidûment,
 j'aurais réussi mon Matric.

 Present tense: e.g. La porte est fermée à clé chaque soir à 18h00.
 e.g Il est aimé par sa femme.
 e.g. La porte est fermée en ce moment.
 Progressive present : être en train de + infinitive e.g. La porte est en train d'être fermée.
 Past perfect tense e.g. Un nouveau supermarché a été ouvert cette année.
 Simple past tense e.g. La bibliothèque était ouverte pendant les vacances.
 Future time e.g. L'année prochaine notre nouvelle bibliothèque va être construite/sera
 construite.
 Subjonctif e.g Je veux que la tarte soit faite par Anne.

Reported
 Reported questions e.g. Elle m’a demandé pourquoi j’étais si en retard./Il m’a demandé quel type de
speech
 musique j’aimais.
 Subordinate clauses: e.g. Elle a dit qu’elle ne savait pas./Il m’a dit qu’il avait perdu le livre.

Sentence
 Statement e.g. Oui, il va au cinéma..
structures
 Questions e.g. Il va au cinéma ? Est-ce qu’il va au cinéma ?
 Negatives e.g Il ne va pas au cinéma.
 Command / imperative e.g Allons au cinéma ! Ne fais pas cela !

Spelling / Spelling patterns, spelling rules and conventions, abbreviations, acronyms
orthographe Begins to recognise basic reported speech.

Vocabulary Synonyms e.g. envoyer and lancer
development Antonym e.g. grand vs petit
and figurative
 La nominalisation e.g. exploser – une explosion
language /
développement Figures of speech (simile, metaphor, personification)
du lexique et de Idiomatic expressions/idioms/proverbs
la langue figurée
 Borrowed words

 baby-foot, best-seller, blazer, blue-jean, blues, boycott, break, caddie, cafétéria, cardigan, charter,
 chewing-gum, chips, cross-country, hamburger, import-export, jackpot, job, jogging, ketchup, laser, lift,
 match, média, microphone, mile, miss, modern style, mohair, moleskin, morse, play-back.

Punctuation / Hyphen, colon, semi-colon, apostrophe, quotation marks, parentheses, ellipses, exclamation mark,
ponctuation question mark, comma

Connectors / Logical connectors to link sentences in a paragraph:

 21
 addition: e.g. et, mais, parce que
 articulateurs
 sequence in time: e.g. ensuite, après, bientôt, puis, avant, plus tard, soudainement
 logiques
 ordering ideas: e.g. d’abord, premièrement, deuxièmement, enfin
 cause/effect: e.g. parce que, donc

3.2 EXPRESSIONS USED IN CONVERSATIONAL FRENCH - REFERENCE LIST

ASKING PERMISSION/ REQUESTS INTERRUPTING

  Est-ce que je peux… ?  Excuse-moi, est-ce que je peux... ?
 Excusez-moi, pourrais-je… ?
  Est-ce que je pourrais… ?
  Pardon, tu penses que je peux… ?
  Serait-il possible pour moi de… ? Pardon, pensez-vous que je puisse… ?

  Est-ce que ça va si… ?  Excuse-moi, tu connais… ?
 Excusez-moi, connaissez-vous… ?
  Est-ce que ça irait si… ?
  Excuse-moi, tu peux m’aider ?
  Ça t’ennuie si je… ? Excusez-moi, pourriez-vous m’aider ?
 Ça vous ennuie si je… ?

  S’il te plaît, laisse-moi…
 S’il vous plaît, laissez-moi…

  Serais-tu d’accord de… ?
 Seriez-vous d’accord de… ?

OFFERING HELP SEEKING ASSISTANCE

  Puis-je vous aider ?  Peux-tu m’aider à… ?
 Pouvez-vous m’aider à… ?
  Est-ce que je peux t’aider?
 Est-ce que je peux vous aider ?  Pourrais-tu m’aider à… ?
 Pourriez-vous m’aider à… ?
  Tu cherches quelque chose?
 Vous cherchez quelque chose?  J’ai besoin d’aide pour…

  Tu veux de l’aide?  Veuillez m’aider à…
 Vous voulez de l’aide?
  Peux-tu me donner un coup de main pour…
  Tu as besoin d’aide? Pourriez-vous me donner un coup de main pour…
 Vous avez besoin d’aide?

  Qu’est-ce que je peux faire pour toi aujourd’hui?
 Que puis-je faire pour vous aujourd’hui ?

APOLOGISING COMPLAINING

  Désolé(e).  Je suis désolée de devoir te dire ça, mais…
 Je suis désolée de devoir vous dire cela, mais…
  Je suis désolé(e) de…
  Excuse-moi de te déranger, mais…
  Je regrette de… Excusez-moi de vous déranger, mais…

  S’il te plaît, pardonne-moi de…  Il est possible que tu aies oublié de…
 S’il vous plaît, pardonnez-moi de… Il est possible que vous ayez oublié de…

  Je pense que tu as peut-être oublié de…

 22
  Je m’excuse de… Je pense que vous avez peut-être oublié de…

  Pardonne-moi.  Excuse-moi si c’est déplacé, mais…
 Pardonnez-moi. Excusez-moi si c’est déplacé, mais…

  Excuse-moi.  Il y a pu y avoir un malentendu au sujet de…
 Excusez-moi.
  Qu’on ne se méprenne pas, …
  Je te demande pardon.
 Je vous demande pardon.

GIVING ADVICE STATING A PREFERENCE

  Je ne pense pas que tu devrais…  Est-ce que tu voudrais… ?
 Je ne pense pas que vous devriez… Voulez-vous… ?

  Tu devrais…  Je préférerais…
 Vous devriez…
  Pourquoi on ne…
  Tu ne devrais pas…
 Vous ne devriez pas…  Et bien, je préférerais… Tu en penses quoi?
 Et bien, je préférerais… Qu’en pensez-vous?
  Si j’étais toi, je…
 Si j’étais vous, je…  Qu’est-ce que tu penses qu’on devrait faire?
 Que pensez-vous qu’on devrait faire ?
  Si j’étais dans ta position, je…
 Si j’étais dans votre position, je…  Si cela ne tenait qu’à moi, je…

  Si j’étais à ta place, je…  Je pense qu’on devrait…

 Si j’étais à votre place, je…

  Tu aurais mieux fait de…
 Vous auriez mieux fait de…

  Il ne faudrait pas que tu…
 Il ne faudrait pas que vous…

  Quoique tu fasses, ne … pas …

GUESSING, INFERRING GIVING IMPRECISE INFORMATION

  Je dirais qu’il est presque prêt à ...  Il y a environ…

  Cela manque peut-être de …  Il y a approximativement…

  Il pourrait être…  Il y a un grand nombre de…

  On dirait que…  … prévoie(nt) jusqu’à…

  Il a peut-être besoin de…  C’est un peu…

  Peut-être qu’ils veulent…  C’est le type de…

  C’est difficile à dire, mais j’imagine que…  Ils sont du genre à…

  Je ne suis pas trop sûr(e), mais je pense que…  C’est difficile à dire, mais je dirais…

  Je ne suis pas trop sûr(e), mais je pense…

 23
 SAYING GOODBYE EVALUATING YOURSELF
Long trips, vacations, short outings
  Ça a bien marché / c’était efficace parce que…
  Bon voyage.
  J’ai fait ça bien parce que…
  Passe de bonnes vacances.
 Passez de bonnes vacances.  Cela aurait été mieux si j’avais…

  Fais bon voyage.  Cela pourrait être amélioré en…
 Faites bon voyage.
  Les progrès sont / ne sont pas évidents parce que…
  Profite bien de tes vacances.
 Profitez bien de vos vacances.

  Profite!
 Profitez!

  Amuse-toi bien à … (destination place such as a
 restaurant OR city)

GREETING AFTER A TRIP

  Comment se sont passées tes vacances à… ?

  Ça t’a plu à (destination)?
 Ça vous a plu à… ?

  Comment s’est passé le voyage / le vol?

3.3 SPREADS OF TEXTS ACROSS GRADES 4-6

A variety of texts have been selected for each two-week period. The key texts are captured below. Learners will
engage with some or all of the texts in a two-week period, that is, they will listen to or present orally or read or write.

Spread of texts table

 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 Weeks Term 1

 1-2 Story Story Story; language game

 3-4 Information text e.g. narrative Information text with visuals e.g. Information text: descriptive account;
 recount, map, maps/pictures/ conversation; media text e.g. advert
 narrative recount

 5-6 Story and descriptions of Story, role-play, description of Story
 people or characters people; invitation; message

 7-8 Information text : instructions, Information text: instructions; Information text with visuals e.g.
 lists language game maps/pictures instructions; definitions

 24
 9 - 10 Song, poem Poem; song Poem; Song description of a person;
 description of an object/animal/plant/place;
 language game

Weeks Term 2

11 - 12 Story Story Story and message, conversation

13 - 14 Information text with visuals Information text with visuals e.g. Information text e.g. description of
 e.g. pictures; poster; maps/pictures; descriptions of object/animal/ plant/place; visual text e.g.
 directions, description of an object/s/ plants/animals/places pictures /maps /photographs
 object

15 - 16 Personal recount Personal recount Story, personal recount; role play

17- 18 Procedures, instructions Information text: instructions; Reads information text with visuals e.g.
 information text with visuals factual account timetables and television schedules/ maps/
 e.g. pictures/ pictures; definitions; language game
 maps/photographs

19 - 20 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

Weeks Term 3

21- 22 Story, description of Story; oral description of Story; oral descriptions of places/animals/
 person/animal/character, places/people; personal recount plants / objects
 dialogue

23 - 24 Information text e.g. factual Information text with visuals e.g. Information text with visuals e.g.
 recount audio-visual text e.g. maps/pictures /maps/pictures/ talk;
 poster/ notices; conversation

25 - 26 Story; poem Story; poem Story; poem

27- 28 Information text with visuals Information text -; conversation; Information texts -language game; mind
 e.g. pictures; descriptions of language game; descriptions of map
 places/plants/animals/objects places/plants/animals/objects descriptions of
 procedures procedures places/plants/animals/objects procedures

2 9 - 30 role-play; dialogue; conversation; dialogue conversation; dialogue

Weeks Term 4

 25
 31- 32 Conversation, language Story, language game; personal Story; conversation; dialogue
 game; story recount

 33 - 34 Information text with visuals Information text: factual text; information text talk; language game;
 e.g. pictures; visual text e.g. poster definitions;
 posters/notices; messages

 35 - 36 Story, language game Story, poem, personal recount Story, poem

 37 - 38 Conversation; talk; Information text, conversation; Information text and visual text poster;
 Information text; visual text poster; visual text e.g. chart advertisement
 e.g. poster/notice

 39 - 40 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

3.3.1 Summary of text types across the phase

The tables below describe the range of text types that learners should be taught to write in Grades 4-6; other texts
could also be included where appropriate. Some of these texts are not included in the teaching plan tables. This does
not mean that they should not form part of teaching and learning as they are equally important.

 Text type Language structures found in each text type

 Personal recounts Descriptive language, e.g. adjectives, adverbs

 Verb tenses, e.g. past tense (passé composé, imparfait)

 Time words to connect events, e.g. adverbs of time

 Words which tell us where, when, with whom, how (où, quand, avec qui, comment)

 Simple Sentences

 Connectors, e.g. puis, bientôt, après, ensuite, etc.

 Direct and Indirect Speech

 Nouns and pronouns

 Factual recounts Adverbs and Adverbial phrases

 Nouns and pronouns

 Prepositions

 Verb tenses, e.g. past tense (passé composé, imparfait)

 Verbs

 Story and plays Action words, e.g. verbs

 Adverbs to describe actions

 Adjectives to describe characters and setting

 26
 Text type Language structures found in each text type

 Simple and complex sentences

 Connectors (especially time words) for showing sequence of events, e.g. puis, bientôt, après,
 ensuite, etc

 Direct and Indirect Speech

 A range of verb tenses especially past tense (passé composé, imparfait)

 Punctuation, e.g. colon, exclamation marks, question marks

Poems Figurative language, e.g. personification, simile, metaphor, etc.

 Nouns

 Adjectives

 Pronouns

 Adverbs

 Prepositions

 Simple sentences

Procedures/ Verbs often at the beginning of each instruction
Instructions/ Command form of the verb
Directions
 Adverbs

 Words which tell us how, when, where, with whom (comment, quand, où, avec qui,)

 Connectors to show the sequence in steps, e.g. puis, bientôt, après, ensuite, etc.

 Prepositions

 Verb tenses, e.g. present tense (présent)

 Determiners

Conversations Verbs

 Prepositions

 Pronouns

 Sentence structures, e.g. questions

 Verb tenses, e.g. present (présent), past (passé composé, imparfait)

Information texts Nouns

 Verb tenses, e.g. present (présent)

 Verbs

 Adjectives

 Prepositions

 Determiners

 Pronouns

 27
 Text type Language structures found in each text type

 Vocabulary development, e.g. vocabulary for comparing, contrasting relationships

 Punctuation, e.g. comma

Definitions Verb tenses, e.g. present (présent)

 Nouns

 Adjectives

 Determiners

Descriptions Verb tenses, e.g. present (présent), past tenses (passé composé, imparfait)

 Nouns

 Adjectives used to give details

 Determiners

 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 INFORMATION

Narrative and descriptive recounts e.g. Factual /narrative/descriptive recounts Explanations such as reference books,
 news, stories, description of e.g. news stories, description of dictionaries, definitions, texts from
 something - based on fact something - based on fact other subjects
General knowledge texts General knowledge texts Factual recounts such as news reports
Media texts such as radio Information texts (headline, explain the headline, body,
 announcements comment), eye-witness accounts
 Media texts e.g. radio announcements
Instructions such as instructions for Information texts
 Instructions such as instructions for
 experiments, rules of games, experiments, rules of games, Media texts: advertisements, posters,
 directions directions magazine articles
Visual texts: maps, photographs, Visual texts: photographs, pictures Instructions such as instructions for
 pictures experiments, rules of games,
 directions
 Visual texts: maps, photographs,
 pictures

 LITERARY

Narratives: contemporary realistic Narratives e.g. contemporary realistic Narratives such contemporary realistic
 fiction, myths and legends, fables, fiction, myths and legends, fables, fiction, myths and legends, fables,
 fantasy, adventure, funny, real life fantasy, adventure, funny, real life fantasy, adventure, funny, real life
 stories. stories, historical fiction stories, historical fiction, science
Personal recounts such as oral Personal recounts such as oral fiction, narrative poems
 anecdotes (events in order), diary anecdotes (sets the scene, events in Personal recounts such as. oral
 entries order), diary entries anecdotes (sets the scene, events in
Poem, play, role play Poem, play, role play order, personal comment), diary
 entries, autobiographies
 Poem, play, role play

 28
 SOCIAL/FUNCTIONAL

 Conversations e.g. making enquiries, Conversations: making requests, Conversations: making requests,
 giving information about family explaining, giving information about explaining, giving information about
 Short social texts: greeting cards, community community
 notes, messages Short social texts: notices, messages Short social/functional texts: notices,
 messages

3.3.2 Length of Texts for Second Additional Language (to be produced by learners)

 Text Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 Paragraph
 Words 10 - 20 words 20 - 30 words 30 - 40 words

 Sentences
 3 - 4 sentences 4 - 6 sentences 6 - 8 sentences

 Oral creative texts e.g.
 recounts, retelling or 3 min 3 min 3-4 min
 telling stories

 Written creative and
 20 words 30 words 40 words
 information texts e.g.
 1 paragraph 1 paragraph 2 paragraphs
 recounts, stories, reports

 Shorter texts, e.g.
 Messages, notes 10 - 20 words 20 - 30 words 30 - 40 words
 descriptions

3.3.3 Length of Texts for Second Additional Language (for learners to engage with)

 Task Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 Longer listening
 comprehension texts e.g.
 100-150 / up to 5 mins 150-200 / up to 5 mins 200-250 / up to 5 mins
 story, interviews, plays,
 news reports

 Shorter listening
 comprehension texts e.g. 50-60 words / 1-2 mins 60-70 words / 1-2 mins 70-80 words / 1-2 mins

 announcements,

 29
 information texts,
 instructions, directions

 Reading
 comprehension/intensive 100-150 words 150-200 words 200-250 words
 reading texts

3.3.4 Vocabulary to be attained by Second Additional Language learners

 Term 1 2 3 4

 Vocabulary Grade 4 20 - 30 30 - 40 40 - 50 50 - 60

 Common spoken
 words Grade 5 60 - 70 70 - 80 80 - 90 90 - 100

 Grade 6 100 - 110 110 - 120 120 - 130 130 - 150

 Reading 30 - 50 30 - 50 30 - 50 30 - 50
 Grade 4
 vocabulary (new (10 - 20) (10 - 20) (10 - 20) (10 - 20)
 words)

 Grade 5 50 - 80 50 - 80 50 - 80 50 - 80

 Grade 6 80 - 100 80 - 100 80 - 100 80 - 100

3.4 TEACHING PLANS
The teaching plan indicates the minimum content to be covered per term. The sequence of the content listed
in a two-week cycle is not prescribed and the time given is an approximate indication of how long it should
take to cover the content. Teachers should design their teaching plans / work schedules using their textbooks
to teach the content per two-week cycle using appropriate sequence and pace. The content given in a two-
week cycle are key texts/activities with the main skills and strategies learners need to develop.

3.4.1 How texts link together in the two-week cycle

Different texts have been used as a basis for designing the two-week teaching cycle. They have been selected on the
basis of how they link together to form an integrated unit, for example learners will listen to a story and then read a
story. They will be asked to write a short oral description of a place or person (that will link to the story) or they might
be asked to write a message about the story. Select a theme for each two-week cycle that will enable the teacher to
link the activities successfully. The reason for using themes is to make it possible to constantly recycle vocabulary and
language structures in meaningful contexts. In practice, integration suggests variety: variety of forms, of activities, of
texts and themes (see Suggested Themes - Reference List below)

3.4.2 How the texts/activities are sequenced across the two-week cycle

The texts do not have to be taught in a particular order. In most cases, there should be a Listening and Speaking
 30
 activity/text to prepare for the reading or writing activity. Sometimes, the Listening and Speaking activity should derive
from the reading text. Learners should engage with the different kinds of texts orally and in reading before they are
asked to write these texts. In most cases, the text to be listened to e.g. a story will be different to and at a higher level
than the one that learners will read. This is because their listening skills are more developed than their reading skills.

3.4.3 The type of texts prescribed and recommended

There are prescribed text types that are to be taught in every two-week cycle. These are specified in the teaching plan
and should be contained in the prescribed textbook. In most cases, no specific story type is prescribed. Choices may
be made from the variety of contemporary stories, imaginative stories (e.g. adventure, and traditional stories (e.g.
myths, legends and fables) that are available. The same is true of poems and songs.

In all cases, this additional reading should relate to the topics and themes chosen for the prescribed texts in that two-
week cycle. This is very important as it consolidates the Second Additional Language learner’s knowledge and
understanding of the vocabulary and concepts related to the topic.

3.4.4 Number of key texts in a two-week cycle

In the early part of the year, there is usually only one text type or activity per two-week cycle. There will sometimes be
two text types or activities per two-week cycle. Teach these text types and the related activities bearing in mind that
learners will be exposed to them numerous times during the course of the year.

3.4.5 How the Language Structures and Conventions are addressed

The content of the “Language Structures and Conventions” section is derived from the types of texts prescribed under
the headings Listening and Speaking, Reading, and Writing and will naturally be given attention in the process of
engaging with the texts and during the time allocated for Listening and Speaking, Reading and Writing. For example, if
a story is being done, learners will naturally use the simple past tense and will read texts using this tense. However, it
is also important that activities be developed that focus on particular language structures, in context. Choose items
from the “Language Structure and Conventions” section to give learners additional practice in these aspects.
Construct activities that are meaningful to learners and that relate to the texts they are studying in the two-week cycle.
More activities of this nature should be done as learners make progress from Grade 4 to 6. Select very carefully which
rules to be explained to learners and keep these to a minimum. Second Additional Language learners learn a
language through constant exposure to it and through using to it. Practice in Language Structures and Conventions
will refine these skills. Teaching should integrate all the language skills and language structures as they are
interrelated. All of these should be taught in context.

 Suggested Themes - Reference List

 Animals House
 Body Likes and dislikes
 Clothes Music
 Colours Nature/environment
 Days and Months Places
 Emotions School
 Family Sport
 Food Time
 Greetings Transport
 Hobbies Weather and seasons

 31
 3.5 CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR FRENCH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE
3.5.1 GRADE 4

 GRADE 4

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listening and Speaking Reading Introduce script Working with words
 Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 Basic conversation in target language Reads words based on written Writes basic words
 words - e.g. builds word families based
 (e.g. greetings) conversation Writes words about the story
 on how they sound or look.
 Answers simple questions Answers basic questions about the text
 Builds on knowledge of sight words
 Names characters in the story Expresses feelings about the text
 Working with words
 Code switches if necessary Discusses new vocabulary from the read
 text Understands and uses words in context
 Practises Listening and Speaking
 Spells five words from read text Vocabulary in context
 Emphasize the practice of phonics

3-4 Listening and Speaking Reading Writing Working with words
 Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 Conversation in target language (e.g. Reads words based on conversation Introduce script
 words e.g. builds word families based on
 communication in the classroom) Writes basic words how they sound or look.
 Answers questions Uses appropriate vocabulary Builds on knowledge of sight words
 Discusses new vocabulary
 Vocabulary in context
 Code switches if necessary

5-6 Listens to a story Reading Introduce script Working with words

 32
 GRADE 4

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Breaks words into syllables, e.g. gar-çon;
 Choose from contemporary realistic Reads an extract from the textbook or Writes about a story
 Writes words or phrases about the story a-ni-mal
 fiction/traditional stories/personal reader/s or Teacher’s Resource File
 Mixing and matching words about the Writes own words to expresses feelings Words starting with selected letters
 accounts/adventure/real life stories
 story with support about the story
 Working with sentences
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 Expresses feelings about the story Builds on use of subject verb concord
 Records words and their meanings in
 Resource File
 Answers questions about the text e.g. Tu aimes / Les filles aiment ...
 Answers simple questions a personal dictionary
 Uses drawings or words using the words Uses regular forms of the verb e.g. je
 Names characters in the story correctly Practises reading
 or explanations to show the meaning, marche, tu marches
 Uses words to express feelings about the Reads aloud: introduce the idea of
 appropriate pronunciation and etc.
 story
 expression
 Code switches if necessary

7-8 Listens to and carries out basic Reads basic procedural Introduce script Working with words
 instructions e.g. recipe/instructions for (instructions)texts e.g. Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Writes simple instructions using a
 personal dictionary
 making or doing something recipe/instructions for making or doing frame
 Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s something Number the instructions
 meanings of words
 Resource File (TRF) Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Uses the right sequence (rearrange in
 correct order) Working with sentences
 Answers questions Resource File (TRF)
 Writes the instructions/words using a Uses the command form.
 Listens and responds appropriately Pre-reading and discussion: predicts
 frame Understands and uses negative forms
 from title and pictures
 Gives simple instructions Corrects spelling using a dictionary Uses tenses e.g. J’ai fini.
 Answers questions about the text
 Uses correct specific details Introduces uses of singular and plural
 Discusses sequence of instructions Records words and their meanings in
 Uses correct sequence correctly
 Follows the instructions a personal dictionary
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Uses drawings or words to show the Vocabulary in context
 Practises reading
 enrichment meaning, etc. Words taken from shared or individually
 Reads aloud: introduce the idea of

 33
 GRADE 4

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 appropriate pronunciation and read texts
 (choose one for daily practice)
 expression
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song
 Responds physically to instructions
 Plays a language game
 Emphasize the practice of phonics

9-10 Listens to a song/simple poem Reads a simple poem/s Introduce script Working with words
 Words belonging to the same lexical field
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Writes 2-3 sentences about the
 e.g. une couverture and une page belong
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) selected poem in a frame to the lexical field un livre
 Discusses central idea Pre-reading: predicts from title and Writes simple phrases
 pictures Working with sentences
 Relates to own experience
 Practises writing for enrichment Uses question marks
 Code switches if necessary Uses reading strategies e.g. prediction,
 Writes words that begin with the same
 looks at pictures carefully, uses Uses exclamation marks
 Identifies words which begin with the sound e.g. Charles / choisit
 contextual clues
 same sound Vocabulary in context
 Answers questions about text Records words and their meanings in
 Expresses feelings stimulated by the text Words taken from shared or individually
 Identifies rhythm and rhyme a personal dictionary read texts
 Performs song/selected lines
 Breaks up words into syllables Uses drawings or sentences/phrases
 Plays a language game /words using the words or explanations
 Expresses feelings stimulated by the text
 Follows instructions correctly to show the meaning, etc.
 Uses vocabulary Reads and solves a word puzzle(for
 enrichment)
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 Spells words correctly
 enrichment Shows understanding of meanings of
 (choose one for daily practice) words
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song
 Practises reading

 34
 GRADE 4

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Responds physically to instructions Reads aloud with appropriate
 Plays a simple language game pronunciation, rhythm and expression

 Emphasize the practice of phonics Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 Expresses basic emotional response
 (likes and dislikes) to texts read.

 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

 Language Structures and
Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting
 Conventions

 1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story Introduce script Working with words
 Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 Choose from contemporary realistic Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Writes a short message
 words e.g. builds word families based
 fiction/traditional stories/personal Resource File (TRF) Chooses appropriate content
 on how they sound or look.
 accounts/ adventure/real life stories Pre-reading and discussion: predicting Addresses text to a person
 Builds on knowledge of sight words and
 from title and pictures Ends with own name
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s high frequency words
 answers questions about the story
 Records words and their meanings in a Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Resource File (TRF)
 Identifies setting and character and first letters of a word to find words

 35
 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

 Language Structures and
Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting
 Conventions

 Predicts what will happen next in a dictionary.
 Does comprehension activity on the personal dictionary
 Answers simple questions Uses drawings or sentences/phrases using Singular and Plural examples
 text (oral)
 Names characters in the story correctly Discusses new vocabulary from the the words or explanations to show the Uses the gender forms of some nouns
 read text meaning, etc. e.g. un chien / une chienne
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 Uses a dictionary Working with sentences
 enrichment
 Builds on use of proper nouns
 (choose one for daily practice) Practises reading
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song Reads aloud with appropriate Vocabulary in context
 pronunciation, expression and tempo Words taken from shared or individually
 Responds physically to instructions
 read texts
 Plays a simple language game
 Emphasize the practice of phonics

 3-4 Listens to information text e.g. simple Reads information text with visuals Writes information text with support (in a Working with words
 topics e.g. Communication at the garage e.g. /pictures/maps/drawings and frame) Introduces plurals

 or supermarket photographs Fills in missing words in a written Words with long vowel sounds
 text/summary
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Working with sentences
 Uses appropriate vocabulary
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) Understands and uses the possessive
 Uses some new words from the read text form of the noun e.g. les yeux de Sylvie
 Identifies specific details Pre-reading and discussion: predicting
 from title and pictures/visuals Designs a visual text e.g. a poster Revises un/une/des and le/la/l’/les with
 Relates to personal experience/
 nouns.
 Code switches if necessary Asks and answers simple questions advertising an event
 Introduce script Introduces tenses
 Listens to and responds to simple oral Discusses main idea
 conversation/instructions / description Interprets the information in the visuals Selects appropriate information Vocabulary in context
 Uses the correct format Words taken from shared or individually
 Follows the instructions/ description Reads a visual text e.g. a poster
 Uses basic features such as colour and read texts

 36
 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

 Language Structures and
Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting
 Conventions

 different sizes or kinds of print (font) Synonyms (words that are similar in
 Shows understanding of vocabulary advertising an event
 meaning e.g. un ami / un copain)
 relating to conversation / instructions / Pre-reading: discusses pictures Records words and their meanings in a
 description Interprets the information personal dictionary
 Discusses the purpose of the text Uses drawings or sentences/phrases using
 Listens to a description and
 Discusses some of the language used the words or explanations to show the
 describes an object meaning, etc.
 Identifies and discusses design features
 Identifies the object described correctly
 such as colour and different sizes or
 Uses words that correctly describe the kinds of print (font)
 object
 Uses some new words
 Uses adjectives

 Practises Listening and Speaking

 (choose one for daily practice)
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song
 Responds physically to instructions
 Plays a simple language game
 Emphasize the practice of phonics

 5-6 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a short message/notes Working with words
 Chooses appropriate content Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Choose from traditional stories/personal Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 Addresses text to a person and first letters of a word to find words
 accounts/ adventure/real life stories Resource File (TRF) in a dictionary.
 Pre-reading and discussion: predicting Ends with own name
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Reinforce singular and plural examples
 from title and pictures Records words and their meanings in a
 Resource File (TRF) Uses the gender forms of some nouns

 37
 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

 Language Structures and
Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting
 Conventions

 Predicts what will happen next Answers questions about the story e.g. un chien / une chienne
 personal dictionary
 Answers simple questions Introduces setting and character Uses drawings or sentences/phrases using Working with sentences
 Names characters in the story the words or explanations to show the Builds on use of proper nouns
 Does comprehension activity on the
 Identifies characters from oral meaning, etc.
 text (oral) Introduce verbs
 descriptions
 Discusses new vocabulary from the Uses different types of adjectives
 Practises Listening and Speaking read text Builds on understanding and uses
 Uses a dictionary tenses
 (choose one for daily practice)
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song Builds on use of subject verb concord
 Practises reading
 Responds physically to instructions Reads aloud with appropriate Vocabulary in context
 Plays a simple language game pronunciation, expression and tempo Words taken from shared or individually
 Emphasize the practice of phonics read texts

 7-8 Listens to and carries out basic Reads basic procedural (instructions) Introduce script Working with words
 instructions e.g. recipe/instructions for text e.g. a recipe/instructions for doing Words with long and double vowel
 Writes about a procedure with support
 sounds:
 making or doing something or making something
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) personal dictionary
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) Fills details into a frame Uses the dictionary to check spelling
 Discusses specific details of text Pre-reading with discussion: predicting Uses specific details and meanings of words
 Asks questions to obtain information from title and pictures Builds on knowledge of sight words and
 Stays on topic in a frame
 Listens and responds appropriately Discusses specific details of text high frequency words
 Uses appropriate grammar, spelling and
 Discusses sequence of instructions punctuation
 Gives instructions (at least two steps) Working with sentences
 Uses appropriate vocabulary Records words and their meanings in a Uses the command form of the verb
 personal dictionary
 e.g. Arrête !

 38
 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

 Language Structures and
Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting
 Conventions

 Introduces the uses of verbs Teach interrogatives
 Labels and/or completes a visual text e.g.
 Gives instructions in the correct
 drawing/pictures/cartoons/maps/photographs Vocabulary in context
 sequence
 Listens /reads information / includes specific Antonyms (words that are opposite in
 Practises Listening and Speaking details meaning e.g. grand/petit)
 Uses appropriate vocabulary Words taken from shared or individually
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 Writes labels in correct place read texts
 Responds physically to instructions
 Gives and follows simple instructions / Records words and their meanings in a
 directions
 personal dictionary
 Emphasize the practice of phonics Uses drawings or sentences/phrases /words
 or explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 39
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Listens to information text e.g. simple Reads information text with visuals Introduce script Working with words
 topics e.g. My family e.g. pictures/maps/drawings and Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 Labels and/or completes a visual text
 words e.g. builds word families based on
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s photographs e.g. how they sound or look.
 Resource File (TRF) Text from the textbook or Teacher’s drawing /pictures / cartoons / maps / Builds on knowledge of sight words and
 Identifies specific details Resource File (TRF) high frequency words
 photographs
 Relates to personal experience Pre-reading and discussion: predicting Listens /read information Includes Breaks long words into smaller chunks
 Code switches if necessary from title and pictures/visuals specific details e.g. gar-çon; a-ni-mal
 Asks and answers simple questions Uses appropriate vocabulary Builds on the use of singular and plural
 Listens to and responds to simple oral
 Discusses main idea forms of nouns
 Writes labels in correct place
 description
 Interprets the information in the visuals Working with sentences
 Follows the description Records words and their meanings in
 Does comprehension activity on the Builds on use of personal pronouns (je,
 Shows understanding of vocabulary a personal dictionary
 tu, il, elle, nous, ils)
 relating to description text (oral) Uses drawings or sentences/words/
 Reinforces connectors
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Reads a simple text. phrases to show the meaning, etc. Builds on use of demonstrative
 enrichment Discusses main ideas
 adjectives (ce, cet, cette, ces)
 Responds to simple questions
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 Vocabulary in context
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song Practises reading
 Words taken from shared or individually
 Plays a simple language game Reads aloud with appropriate
 read texts
 Gives and follows simple instructions/ pronunciation, expression and tempo

 directions
 Tells own news
 Retells a story heard or read
 Emphasize the practice of phonics

 40
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 3-4 Participates in short conversation on Reads information text e.g. a short text Introduce script Working with words
 a familiar topic / story / poem / song Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Write short information text with
 Takes turns and first letters of a word to find words in
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s support a dictionary.
 Stays on topic Fills in missing words in a written
 Resource File (TRF) Reinforces words starting with selected
 Asks relevant questions Pre-reading and discussion: predicts summary/text
 letters
 from title and pictures Uses appropriate vocabulary
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 Working with sentences
 Answers simple questions e.g. Uses some new words from the read text
 enrichment Uses nouns and plurals
 Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 (Choose one for daily practice) What? Who? When? Introduce Revises un/une/des and le/la/l’/les with
 meanings of words
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song complex questions Why...? How do nouns.
 Records words and their meanings in Begins to use determiners such as un,
 Plays a simple language game you think...?
 Gives and follows simple instructions/ a personal dictionary deux, etc. and premier, deuxième,
 Does comprehension activity on the dernier, etc.
 Uses drawings or sentences using the
 directions
 text (oral) words or explanations to show the
 Tells own news Vocabulary in context
 Practises reading meaning, etc.
 Retells a story heard or read Words taken from shared or individually
 Reads aloud striving for appropriate read texts
 Emphasize the practice of phonics pronunciation, expression and tempo

 5-6 Listens to information contained in a Reads information contained in a Introduce script Working with words
 poster poster Words starting with selected letters
 Designs and produces a visual text
 Identifies specific details Reads visual text e.g. poster
 e.g. poster or notice Working with sentences
 Listens and relates to own experience Pre-reading: discusses pictures
 Uses the correct format Understands and uses countable nouns
 Discusses information own words Discusses what the text is about e.g. un livre - des livres
 Selects appropriate information
 Code switching Identifies specific information Builds on use of adjectives before nouns
 Uses basic design features such as
 Understands the information colour and different sizes or kinds of e.g. le petit chien
 Listens to a poem/s/song for

 41
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Discusses the purpose of the text print (font) Uses the verbs être and avoir
 enrichment
 Discusses what the poem is about Discusses some of the language used Words taken from shared or individually
 Writes sentences
 Identifies and discusses basic design read texts
 Relates to own experience Uses appropriate vocabulary
 features such as colour and different
 Identifies rhyme and rhythm Uses knowledge of syllables to
 sizes or kinds of print (font)
 Identifies words which begin with the develop new words
 same sound Reads a poem/s/song for enrichment
 Records words and their meanings in
 Expresses feelings stimulated by the Pre-reading: predicts from title and
 pictures a personal dictionary
 poem
 Uses drawings or sentences using the
 Performs poem/selected lines Uses reading strategies with support e.g.
 words or explanations to show the
 prediction, looks at pictures or text
 Practises Listening and Speaking for meaning, etc.
 carefully, uses contextual clues
 enrichment Identifies rhythm and rhyme
 Practises using words that imitate their Breaks up words into syllables
 sounds e.g. bees buzz, glass tinkles
 Expresses feelings stimulated by the
 Emphasize the practice of phonics poem

 Practises reading
 Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, expression and tempo

 42
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 7-8 Listens to information text e.g. factual Reads information text with visuals Introduce script Working with words
 recount / narrative e.g. maps / pictures / photographs Words with long/short/nasal vowel
 Labels and/or completes visual text
 sounds e.g. â, ê, ô / i, ai, u/un bon vin
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s e.g. maps / pictures / cartoons /
 Working with sentences
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) photographs / drawings
 Pre-reading: predicting from title and Uses appropriate vocabulary Begins to use prepositions
 Listens to description of and
 pictures/visuals Labels the text correctly Extends use of forms of the verb
 describes places/plants/
 Uses reading strategies Uses correct format for labels e.g. one or Builds on use of connectors to show
 animals/objects contrast (mais), reason (parce que) and
 Identifies and comments on main idea two words only
 Identifies places correctly purpose (pour).
 and specific details with support
 Uses words that correctly describe the Records words and their meanings in
 Interprets information in the visual text Vocabulary in context
 place a personal dictionary
 Words taken from shared or individually
 Uses some new words Does comprehension activity on the Uses drawings or sentences using the
 read texts
 Uses adjectives text (oral or written) words or explanations to show the
 meaning, etc.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 enrichment

 (Choose one for daily practice)
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song
 Plays a simple language game
 Gives and follows simple instructions/
 directions
 Tells own news
 Retells a story heard or read
 Emphasize the practice of phonics

 43
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 9-10 Listens to a dialogue read aloud or Reads dialogue Introduce script Working with words
 from radio or TV Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Writes a dialogue using a frame or
 personal dictionary
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s speech bubbles
 Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Resource File (TRF) Selects appropriate characters
 Resource File (TRF) meanings of words
 Pre-reading predicting from title Organises the conversation logically
 Introduction to Role Play: plays a Working with sentences
 Identifies the story-line Uses the frame correctly
 character or a familiar situation Builds on understanding and use of
 Discusses characters and setting Uses direct speech appropriately
 Selects appropriate content with support tenses
 Using basic vocabulary to express Uses vocabulary
 Uses details accurately Uses adverbs of time (demain, hier)
 feelings stimulated by the text Uses appropriate grammar, spelling, Begins to recognise and use reported
 Stays on topic
 Discusses features of the text especially punctuation and spacing speech and related punctuations
 Switches from one language to another
 as appropriate punctuation and format
 Records words and their meanings in Vocabulary in context
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Practises reading a personal dictionary Words taken from shared or individually
 Reads aloud with appropriate read texts
 enrichment Uses drawings or sentences using the
 pronunciation, expression and tempo
 (Choose one for daily practice) words or explanations to show the
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song meaning, etc.
 Plays a simple language game
 Gives and follows simple instructions/
 directions
 Tells own news
 Retells a story heard or read
 Emphasize the practice of phonics

 44
 GRADE 4

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Participates in conversation on a Reads a short text Writes a passage with structured Working with words
 familiar topic ( e.g. The School) support Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Choose from contemporary /traditional
 Uses the frame and fills in missing words meanings of words
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s stories/personal accounts/ adventure/real
 Uses common vocabulary Words starting with selected letters or
 Resource File (TRF) life stories
 Asks relevant questions and responds to Records words and their meanings in sounds
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 questions
 a personal dictionary Working with sentences
 Resource File (TRF)
 Maintains the conversation Uses drawings or sentences using the Begins to use determiners such as un,
 Pre-reading with support: predicts from
 Respects others’ ideas the title and pictures words or explanations to show the deux, etc. and premier, deuxième,
 meaning, etc. dernier, etc.
 Answers simple questions
 Builds on use of subject verb concord
 Does comprehension activity on the e.g. Tu aimes / Les filles aiment ...
 text (oral) Builds on the use of tenses

 Reflects on texts read during Builds on use of prepositions that show
 position (sur, sous, au-dessus)
 independent/pair reading
 visual texts read Vocabulary in context
 Words taken from shared or individually
 read texts

 3-4 Listens to simple announcements Reads information text with visuals Writes a paragraph or 2 - 3 short Working with words
 e.g. maps/pictures/photographs/cartoons sentences using a frame Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 Uses common/familiar vocabulary personal dictionary
 Resource File (TRF) Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 including pronouns, connectors and
 Discusses main ideas Working with sentences
 Resource File (TRF) phrases.
 Asks questions Pre-reading with support: predicts from Uses connectors to show addition (et)

 45
 GRADE 4

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Responds appropriately the title and pictures Uses appropriate grammar, spelling and and sequence (puis, avant)
 Answers simple questions punctuation
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Vocabulary in context
 Uses the dictionary to check spellings
 enrichment Does comprehension activity on the Words taken from shared or individually
 and meanings of words
 read texts
 (Choose one for daily practice) text (oral)
 Draws, labels and/or completes a
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song Reads visual text e.g. poster or notice
 visual text e.g. maps / pictures /
 Plays a simple language game or pamphlet
 photographs / cartoons
 Gives and follows simple instructions/
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Captures the information correctly
 directions
 Resource File (TRF) Shows the links between different parts
 Tells own news of the visual correctly
 Pre-reading: discusses pictures
 Retells a story heard or read Writes sentences describing the visual
 Discusses what the text is about
 Identifies specific information text

 Interprets the information Uses appropriate vocabulary

 Discusses the purpose and audience of Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 the text meanings of words

 Discusses some of the language use Designs and produces a poster

 Reflects on texts read during Records words and their meanings in
 independent/pair reading a personal dictionary
 Retells story or main ideas in 2 to 3 Uses drawings or sentences or words or
 sentences explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Expresses emotional response to texts
 read.

 5-6 Listens to a short story with dialogue Reads a story with dialogue Writes a short story with structured Working with words
 support Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Choose from Text from the textbook or Teacher’s

 46
 GRADE 4

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 meanings of words
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Uses the frame to fill in missing
 Resource File (TRF) Pre-reading with support: predicts from words/phrases Working with sentences
 Predicts what will happen next the title and pictures Uses extended vocabulary including Builds on the use of connectors
 Discusses setting and characters Discusses setting and characters pronouns, connectors and phrases Develops use of direct speech.
 Discusses main events in the story Discusses main events in the story Uses the dictionary to check spelling and Introduces the uses quotation marks for
 Gives a personal response to the story meanings of words direct speech
 Gives a personal response to the story
 Identifies which parts of the story is the Records words and their meanings in
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Vocabulary in context
 dialogue
 a personal dictionary Words taken from shared or individually
 enrichment Role plays the story or a part of the story
 Uses drawings or sentences or words or read texts
 (Choose one for daily practice) Practises reading explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song Reads aloud with appropriate
 or part of a story
 pronunciation and expression
 Plays a simple language game
 Reflects on texts read during
 Gives and follows simple instructions/
 independent/pair reading
 directions
 Relates to own life
 Tells own news
 Retells a story heard or read

 7-8 Participates in conversation on a Reads information text on familiar Writes a paragraph / sentences using Working with words
 familiar topic (e.g. My Friends) topic a frame or speech bubbles Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Uses appropriate content personal dictionary
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 Uses common vocabulary including Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) and first letters of a word to find words in
 pronouns, connectors and phrases.
 Asks relevant questions and responds to Pre-reading with support: predicts from a dictionary
 questions the title and pictures Uses appropriate spelling and
 punctuation Working with sentences
 Maintains the conversation Answers simple questions and begins to

 47
 GRADE 4

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Respects others’ ideas ask more complex questions e.g. Uses the dictionary to check spellings
 Begins to recognise basic reported
 Why? How do you think? and meanings of words
 Practises Listening and Speaking for speech: Reported questions and
 Discusses visuals
 enrichment Records words and their meanings in
 subordinate clauses
 Does comprehension activity on the a personal dictionary
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 text (oral) Uses drawings or sentences /words or
 Performs a simple rhyme, poem or song Builds on the use of adverbs and
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 or part of a story Reflects on texts read during adjectives
 Plays a simple language game independent/pair reading Vocabulary in context
 Gives and follows simple instructions/ Expresses emotional response to texts Words taken from shared or individually
 directions read. read texts
 Tells own news
 Retells a story heard or read

9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 48
 3.5.2 GRADE 5

 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Listens to a short story Reads a short story Writes a personal (narrative / Working with words
 descriptive ) recount of events Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 (Choose from fiction / traditional stories / Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Selects from experience meanings of words
 personal accounts / adventure / funny / Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Chooses appropriate content for the topic Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 fantasy / real life stories / historical [instruction will be repeated every words e.g. builds word families based on
 Stays on the topic
 fiction) fortnight] how they sound or look.
 Frame used by all learners
 Pre-reading: predicting from title and Builds on knowledge of sight words and
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 pictures Uses appropriate grammar, spelling and high frequency words
 Resource File (TRF) [instruction will be punctuation.
 Uses reading strategies e.g. making
 repeated every fortnight] Uses vocabulary related to topic Working with sentences
 predictions, uses phonic and
 Answers questions Understands and uses countable nouns
 contextual clues
 Writes an opinion on a story (for e.g. un livre/des livres
 Predicts what will happen next Discusses new vocabulary from the read
 enrichment) Builds on use of proper nouns e.g. with
 text
 Retells a story Pre-writing: discusses what they like / capital letter
 Discusses the title, and where the story
 Retells events in own words correct dislike Revises un/une/des and le/la/l’/les with
 takes place (setting)
 sequence, using simple past Writes 2 sentences to express what they nouns.
 Expresses simple opinion on the story
 Names the characters correctly like / dislike Builds on use of personal pronouns (je,
 Uses a dictionary tu, il, elle, nous, ils)
 Practises Listening and Speaking Creates a personal dictionary
 Does comprehension activity on the Labels pages with letters of alphabet Vocabulary in context
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 text (oral or written) Enters 5 words and meanings Words taken from shared or individually
 Performs a short poem or rhyme
 Practises reading (drawing/sentence using the read texts
 Plays a simple language game
 word/explanation of word)
 Gives and follows simple Reads aloud with striving towards
 appropriate pronunciation, fluency, and Or continues to enter words into
 instructions/directions
 expression dictionary created in Grade 4
 Tells own news
 Reflects on texts read during

 49
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 independent/pair reading
 Retells story or main ideas in 3 to
 sentences
 Gives opinion on story

 3-4 Takes part in a conversation about a Reads information text with visuals Writes a factual / descriptive recount Working with words
 familiar topic e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps/ in a frame Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 Asks and answers simple questions on Selects appropriate content words e.g. builds word families based on
 maps/ pictures/ graphs/ photographs/
 the topic how they sound or look.
 drawings/ cartoons Sequences events correctly
 Code switches if necessary Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Uses appropriate vocabulary
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or personal dictionary
 Gives other learners a chance to speak Uses appropriate grammar, spelling and
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Working with sentences
 Listens to them punctuation
 Pre-reading: read and discuss title and Builds on understanding and use of
 Corrects spelling using a dictionary and
 Gives a factual / descriptive recount look at pictures / diagrams / maps simple tenses
 redrafts
 Recounts a recent event Uses reading strategies e.g. for general Builds on use of modals: savoir to show
 Tells events in sequence idea, uses contextual clues to find Records words and their meanings in ability, pouvoir to ask for permission,
 meaning a personal dictionary uses devoir to show necessity
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 Identifies main facts Writes sentences using the words or Uses regular forms of the verb e.g. Je
 enrichment explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Explains meaning of unfamiliar words marche / J’ai marché.
 (Choose one for daily practice) Answers questions about the text Uses adverbs of time (demain, hier)
 Performs a short poem or rhyme/or part
 of a short story Practises reading Vocabulary in context
 Reads aloud striving towards appropriate Words taken from shared or individually
 Plays a simple language game
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression read texts
 Gives and follows simple instructions /
 directions Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading

 50
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Tells own news Shares opinions on the text
 Relates text to own life

 5-6 Listens to a story with dialogue Reads a story. Writes a simple description of people Working with words
 Writes at least one paragraph Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 (Choose from fiction/traditional Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Writes creatively words e.g. builds word families based on
 stories/personal accounts/adventure/ Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) how they sound or look.
 Pre-reading: predicts from title and Uses appropriate adjectives
 /real life stories/ Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 pictures Uses simple tenses
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s personal dictionary
 Uses reading strategies e.g. makes Writes a short message
 Resource File (TRF) predictions, uses contextual clues to Working with sentences
 Organises information
 Uses an oral description to identify find meaning, reads to find detail Builds on use of prepositions that show
 people in the story Uses correct format e.g. salutation, date, position (sur, sous, au-dessus)
 Answers questions about the story
 etc.
 Expresses feelings and opinions about Uses connectors to show addition: et and
 the story Reads social texts e.g. invitations Constructs sentences correctly sequence (puis, avant)
 Answers oral questions about the story Discusses purpose of text
 Writes a paragraph Capital letters for proper nouns, for titles
 Uses a dictionary to find meaning of new and initials of people
 Describes an event
 Role play: familiar situations words
 Participates in dialogue Uses connectors Vocabulary in context
 Practises reading Checks spelling and punctuation Words taken from shared or individually
 Includes relevant information
 Reads aloud with appropriate read texts
 Uses correct tense Records words and their meanings in
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression
 Compound words e.g. un taille-crayon
 Practises Listening and Speaking for a personal dictionary
 Reflects on texts read during
 Writes sentences using the words or
 enrichment
 independent/pair reading explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 (Choose one for daily practice) Uses words to express feelings about the
 Performs a short poem or rhyme text read
 Plays a simple language game

 51
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Gives and follows simple instructions /
 directions
 Tells own news

 7-8 Listens to and carries out instructions Reads procedural Writes instructions within a frame Working with words
 e.g. for making or doing something. Uses correct specific details Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 (instructions ) text
 Uses correct sequence, using connectors words e.g. builds word families based on
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or reader/s or how they sound or look.
 e.g. d’abord, puis, etc.
 Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Uses simple tenses
 Responds correctly to instructions, Pre-reading: predicting from title and meanings of words
 Uses correct structure and format
 Follows sequence correctly pictures
 Working with sentences
 Uses reading strategies e.g. prediction, Records words and their meanings in
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Begins to use determiners such as un,
 contextual clues a personal dictionary
 enrichment deux, etc. and premier, deuxième,
 Discusses specific details of text Writes sentences using the words or dernier, etc.
 (Choose one for daily practice) Discusses sequence of instructions explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Begins to use possessive pronouns (le
 Performs a short poem or rhyme/song mien/la mienne, le tien/la tienne, le
 Carries out instructions (if possible)
 Tells own news sien/la sienne)
 Does comprehension activity on the
 Builds on understanding and use of
 text (oral or written) comparative adjectives
 Practises reading Uses forms of the verbs être and avoir
 Reads aloud with appropriate
 Vocabulary in context
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression
 Words taken from shared or individually
 Reflects on texts read during read texts
 independent/pair reading
 Gives short oral review

 52
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Includes key points e.g. title, and / topic
 Gives personal opinion of text

9-10 Listens to a poem/song Reads poem/songs Writes a passage about poem/s Working with words
 Discusses what passage is about Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 words e.g. builds word families based on
 Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Records words and their meanings in how they sound or look.
 Talks about the poem /song (what poem Discusses the topic and main ideas in a personal dictionary Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 is about) the poem Writes sentences using the words or personal dictionary
 Relates to own experience Discusses rhyme explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Working with sentences
 Identifies rhyme and rhythm Discusses words that begin with the
 same sound Uses the gender forms of some nouns
 Gives personal response (likes / dislikes
 e.g. un chien / une chienne
 the poem) Discusses words that imitate their sound
 Uses different types of adjectives
 Discusses comparisons e.g. “He sings
 Performs the poem for enrichment
 like a bird.”, “She is a star.” Vocabulary in context
 Pronounces words correctly
 Answers questions about the poem/s Words taken from shared or individually
 Shows understanding
 (oral or written) read texts
 Conveys rhythm
 Practises reading
 Reads aloud with appropriate
 expression, showing understanding
 Uses good pronunciation, phrasing and
 tempo

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading

 53
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Compares e.g. stories / texts / poems /
 songs read

 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a simple paragraph with a Working with words
 frame Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 (Choose from fiction/traditional Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Writes an appropriate opening sentence meanings of words
 stories/personal accounts/) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Writes about events logically Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Pre-reading: reads with support and
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or and first letters of a word to find words in
 discusses title and looks at pictures Uses connectors (et, mais)
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s a dictionary.
 Uses reading strategies e.g. making Uses some adjectives Writes an
 Resource File (TRF) predictions, using contextual clues appropriate ending Working with sentences
 Answers questions Discusses new vocabulary Uses nouns and plurals
 Records words and their meanings in
 Answers simple questions e.g. des ciseaux, des parents
 Identifies sequence of events, setting
 a personal dictionary
 Takes part in a conversation on a and characters Builds on use of adjectives before nouns
 Writes sentences using the words or
 Uses a dictionary e.g. le petit chien
 familiar topic, code-switching if explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 necessary Does comprehension activity on the Vocabulary in context
 Words taken from shared or individually

 54
 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Asks and answers question read texts
 text (oral or written)
 Respects other learners by listening to
 them Practises reading
 Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 Discusses a short story

 3-4 Listens to information text e.g. oral Reads information text with visuals Writes a short description of objects / Working with words
 description/s of object/s/ plants / animals e.g. charts / tables / diagrams/ mind plants / animals / places using a frame Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 personal dictionary
 / places maps/ maps / pictures / graphs / (3-4 sentences)
 Uses the frame correctly Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s photographs/ drawings / cartoons
 and first letters of a word to find words in
 Includes specific details
 Resource File (TRF) Text from the textbook or reader/s or a dictionary.
 Identifies the object/s Uses correct determiners
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Working with sentences
 Describes what it/they are used for Uses relevant vocabulary
 Pre-reading: predicting from title and Builds on understanding and use of
 Draw and label it pictures/visuals Punctuation is correct
 future tense
 Uses reading strategies Records words and their meanings in Present of reflexives to describe regular
 Practises Listening and Speaking
 Reads for specific information e.g. a personal dictionary actions e.g. Je me brosse les dents tous
 (Choose one for daily practice) timetables or schedules les jours.
 Writes sentences using the words or
 Performs a short poem or rhyme Answers questions on text and visuals Extends use of forms of the verbs être
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Plays a simple language game and avoir
 Does comprehension activity on the
 Gives and follows simple instructions / e.g. J’ai mal à la tête/J’ai dix ans/Je suis
 directions text (oral or written) grand/Je suis journaliste/Je suis d’accord
 Tells own news Practises reading Begins to use prepositions that show

 55
 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Tells of own related experiences Reads aloud with appropriate direction (à, vers), time (à, pendant),
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression possession (à, de)

 Reflects on texts read during Vocabulary in context
 independent/pair reading Words taken from shared or individually
 Retells a text read read texts

 5-6 Takes part in a conversation about a Reads stories. Writes a passage using a frame Working with words
 familiar topic (e. g. Role models ) Writes at least two paragraphs in a frame Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Asks and answers simple questions on Links paragraphs using connectors meanings of words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 the topic Uses new vocabulary and punctuation Breaks long words into smaller chunks
 Pre-reading: predicts from title and
 Code switches if necessary pictures learnt e.g. gar-çon; a-ni-mal
 Gives other learners a chance to speak Uses appropriate grammar, spelling, Working with sentences
 Reads for detail and uses contextual
 Listens to them clues to find information punctuation and spaces between Uses different types of adjectives
 paragraphs
 Identifies and comments on the message Understands and uses verbs to describe
 Gives a factual / descriptive recount Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Understands the vocabulary actions
 Recounts a recent event meanings of words
 Tells events in sequence Answers questions on the story Vocabulary in context
 Records words and their meanings in Words taken from shared or individually
 Retells story in own words (oral or
 Practises Listening and Speaking for writing) a personal dictionary read texts
 enrichment Writes sentences using the words or
 Does comprehension activity on the explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 text (oral or written)
 Performs a short poem or rhyme/or part
 of a short story Practises reading
 Plays a simple language game Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression
 Gives and follows simple instructions /
 directions

 56
 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Tells own news
 Diagram or table about the story

 7-8 Listens to and responds to oral Reads procedural (instructions) text Writes a recipe using a frame Working with words
 instructions e.g. a recipe or instructions for making or Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or personal dictionary
 doing something Resource File (TRF)
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Follows Words starting with selected letters
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Uses the frame correctly
 the instructions
 Includes list of ingredients Working with sentences
 Shows understanding of command words Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Includes method in correct sequence Uses adverbs of place (ici, là, là-bas)
 Pre-reading: predicting from title and
 Role plays familiar situations e.g. giving pictures Uses appropriate vocabulary Begins to use adverbs of degree (très,
 instructions vraiment, presque, trop)
 Uses reading strategies
 Records words and their meanings in Future tense e.g. Je le verrai demain./Je
 Gives at least 2 directions / instructions Answers questions on the text
 in the correct sequence a personal dictionary vais le voir demain.
 Follows the instructions correctly
 Uses appropriate language / vocabulary Writes sentences using the words or Begins to use connectors to show
 and gestures e.g. direction words, the Does comprehension activity on the explanations to show the meaning, etc. contrast (mais), reason (parce que) and
 command form of the verb text (oral or written) purpose (pour).
 Uses question marks
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Practises reading
 Uses exclamation marks
 enrichment Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression Vocabulary in context
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 Words taken from shared or individually
 Performs a short poem or rhyme or part Reflects on texts read during
 read texts
 of a story independent/pair reading
 Plays a simple language game Compares texts read
 Gives and follows simple instructions /

 57
 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 directions

 9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Listens to oral description of places / Reads a story Rewrites the a paragraph/passage in Working with words
 people own words, using a frame Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 (Choose from contemporary realistic
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Uses the simple tenses personal dictionary
 fiction/traditional stories/personal
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Identifies the main events Words starting with selected letters
 accounts/adventure/funny/fantasy/real
 Identifies places/people Tells the events in the correct order Working with sentences
 life stories/historical fiction)
 Notes relevant information from a story Uses appropriate grammar, spelling, Understands and uses nouns
 e.g. on a chart / table Text from the textbook or reader/s or punctuation and spaces between Builds on use of personal pronouns (je,
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) paragraphs tu, il, elle, nous, ils)
 Listens to and gives personal
 Pre-reading: predicts from title and Builds on understanding and use of
 recounts Records words and their meanings in
 pictures adjectives
 Recalls own experiences a personal dictionary
 Answers questions about what happened Understands the features of the text Builds on use of subject verb concord
 Writes sentences using the words or
 first, second, etc. Uses reading strategies e.g. uses e.g. Tu aimes / Les filles aiment...
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 58
 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 contextual clues to determine meaning, Uses forms of the verb
 Practises Listening and Speaking
 makes inferences Builds on the use of question marks
 (Choose one for daily practice) Answers questions about the story Builds on the use of exclamation marks
 Performs a short poem or rhyme or song
 Identifies characters
 or part of a short story Vocabulary in context
 Plays a simple language game Does comprehension activity on the Words taken from shared or individually
 read texts
 Gives and follows simple instructions / text (oral or written)
 directions
 Practises reading
 Tells own news Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency and expression

 Reads a short paragraph
 Discusses main idea and specific details

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 Discussion on text studied

 3-4 Talks about a familiar topic with Reads information texts with visuals Draws/completes and labels simple Working with words
 preparation e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps / visual texts e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Plans and prepares important points meanings of words
 maps / pictures / graphs / photographs / mind maps/ maps/pictures/graphs/
 Says at least 3 sentences on the topic Words starting with selected letters
 drawings / cartoons photographs/drawings/ cartoons
 Answers questions Working with sentences
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 Understands uses of the noun
 Practises Listening and Speaking Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF)
 Begins to use determiners such un,
 (Choose one for daily practice) Pre-reading: focuses on important details Uses information from a visual or written
 deux, etc. and premier, deuxième,
 Performs a short poem or rhyme or song Discusses main information given text
 dernier, etc.
 or part of the story Selects relevant details to answer Organises information

 59
 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Plays a simple language game questions gives information Begins to use pronouns
 Gives and follows simple instructions / Uses different types of adjectives
 Does comprehension activity on the Makes a mind map summary of a
 directions
 text (oral or written) short text Vocabulary in context
 Tells own news Words taken from shared or individually
 Identifies at least three main points
 Practises reading read texts
 Reads aloud with appropriate Records words and their meanings in
 pronunciation, fluency and expression
 a personal dictionary
 Reflects on texts read during Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 independent/pair reading
 Retells a text in about 3 sentences.

 5-6 Listens to stories Reads a story Writes a simple story in a frame Working with words
 Writes a story Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 (Choose from contemporary realistic Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Story has a beginning, a middle and an personal dictionary
 fiction/traditional stories/personal Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ending Words starting with selected letters.
 accounts/adventure/funny/fantasy/real Discusses characters
 Answers questions about story Records words and their meanings in Working with sentences
 life stories/historical fiction)
 Identifies the moral/main message of the a personal dictionary Analyses simple sentences into subject,
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or verb, object
 story Writes sentences using the words or
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) explanations to show the meaning, etc. Begins to use connectors (si, puis)
 Understands stories, answering Does comprehension activity on the
 Develops use of direct speech.
 questions text (oral or written)
 Begins to recognise and use reported
 Expresses own opinion Reads poem/s or song/s speech.

 Retells the story Discusses topic and main idea
 Vocabulary in context
 Refers to main characters Practises reading Words taken from shared or individually
 Retelling of story in own words Reads aloud with appropriate read texts
 Uses tenses introduced in previous

 60
 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 grades pronunciation, fluency and expression

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 Relates texts to own life

 7-8 Takes part in a conversation on a Reads procedural text e.g. instructions Writes on an information text Working with words
 familiar topic (e.g. the weather) Text from the textbook or reader/s or previously used Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Asks and answers questions Writes one to two paragraphs personal dictionary
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Respects other learners by listening to Finds specific details Organises information logically Words starting with selected letters
 them Interprets visuals Uses the dictionary to check spelling and Working with sentences
 Code switches if necessary Discusses the sequence meanings of words Develops understanding and use of
 Uses the writing process with support connecting
 Practises Listening and Speaking Practises reading
 Understands and uses reported speech.
 (Choose one for daily practice) Reads aloud with appropriate Records words and their meanings in
 pronunciation, fluency and expression Understands and uses negative forms
 Performs a short poem or rhyme or song a personal dictionary
 or a part of a story Writes sentences using the words or Vocabulary in context
 Does comprehension activity on the
 Plays a simple language game explanations to show the meaning, etc. Words taken from shared or individually
 text (oral or written)
 Gives and follows simple instructions / read texts
 directions
 Tells own news

 9-10 Takes part in a conversation on a Reads a text Writes a short dialogue/ using a frame Working with words
 familiar topic Selects appropriate characters Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Asks and answers questions Organises the dialogue logically meanings of words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Respects other learners by listening to Uses direct speech Reinforces plural forms
 Pre-reading: predicting from title

 61
 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 them Uses reading strategies with support Uses an informal style of writing
 Working with sentences
 Code switches if necessary Identifies the story-line Uses appropriate punctuation e.g. colon, Uses the gender forms of some nouns
 Asks and answers more complex Discusses characters, setting exclamation and question mark e.g. un chien / une chienne
 questions e.g. What would you do…? Does comprehension activity on the Uses writing process Revises un/une/des and le/la/l’/les with
 text (oral or written) nouns.
 Performs simple role plays Records words and their meanings in
 Uses regular forms of the verb e.g. je
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Practises reading a personal dictionary
 marche / J’ai marché
 Reads aloud with expression, showing Writes sentences using the words or
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Builds on understanding tenses
 understanding of the text explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Develops sensible story line
 Reads aloud using proper pronunciation, Revises use of connectors to show
 Pronounces words audibly and correctly choice e.g. soit…soit…
 pacing and volume.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Vocabulary in context
 Reflects on texts read independently
 enrichment Compares texts read Words taken from shared or individually
 read texts
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 Performs a short poem or rhyme or song
 or a part of a story
 Plays a simple language game
 Gives and follows simple instructions /
 directions
 Tells own news

 62
 GRADE 5

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story or poem or song Writes a recount of events Working with words
 Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 (Choose from /traditional stories/personal Text from the textbook or reader/s or Relates event
 personal dictionary
 accounts/adventure / real life stories / Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Writes a simple story / paragraph / Words ending in selecting letters
 historical fiction) Pre-reading: predicts from the title and
 passage in a frame
 pictures Working with sentences
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Uses story structure
 Uses reading strategies e.g. uses Understands and uses nouns e.g. une
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Links sentences into a coherent
 contextual clues to find the meaning of craie
 Understands stories paragraph using pronouns, connectors
 new words Builds on use of personal pronouns (je,
 and correct punctuation
 Answers questions Discusses main idea and other details. tu, il, elle, nous, ils)
 Uses correct tense
 Asks relevant questions and responds to Identifies the sequence of events Uses different types of adjectives
 Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 questions Identifies the setting and characters Builds on use of subject verb concord
 meanings of words
 Answers and begins to ask some more
 Answers simple question and begins to Uses the following writing process with e.g. Tu aimes / Les filles aiment…
 complex questions e.g. Why couldn’t
 ask some more complex questions e.g. support
 …? What…?; How do you think …? Vocabulary in context
 Why couldn’t …?;
 Records words and their meanings in Words taken from shared or individually
 What…?; How do you think …? read texts
 a personal dictionary
 Does comprehension activity on the Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 text (oral or written)

 Practises reading
 Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency and expression

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 Discusses texts studied

 63
 GRADE 5

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 3-4 Participates in discussion Reads text Writes information text using a frame Working with words
 Discusses familiar topics Selects a relevant topic Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Takes turns, shows respect for others, Includes relevant information meanings of words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 respects others opinions Uses the following writing process with Words with long and short vowel sounds:
 Pre-reading: predicts what text is about
 by previewing it support
 Practises Listening and Speaking Working with sentences
 Answers questions Uses the dictionary to check spelling Uses nouns
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 Performs a short poem or rhyme or song Discusses main ideas and specific and meanings of words Builds on use of pronouns
 details Builds on use of adjectives
 Plays a simple language game Designs a poster
 Gives and follows simple instructions / Does comprehension activity on the Includes relevant information Vocabulary in context
 directions text (oral or written) Includes a picture Words taken from shared or individually
 Tells own news Uses print sizes effectively read texts
 Practises reading
 Reads aloud with appropriate Presents neat, legible, final draft
 pronunciation, fluency and expression
 Records words and their meanings in
 Reads and understands a poster a personal dictionary
 Pre-reading: discusses pictures Writes sentences using the words or
 Interprets the information explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Discusses the text

 5-6 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a recount of events in a frame Working with words
 Relates events in sequence Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 (Choose from traditional stories/personal Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Uses appropriate grammar, vocabulary, personal dictionary
 accounts//real life stories/historical Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 spelling and information. Singular and plural forms of nouns
 fiction) Pre-reading: predicts from the title and
 pictures Uses the writing process with support
 Working with sentences
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Uses reading strategies e.g. uses Uses the dictionary to check spelling

 64
 GRADE 5

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 contextual clues to find the meaning of Builds on understanding tenses
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) and meanings of words
 new words Builds on use of modals: savoir to show
 Identifies plot, characters and actions Discusses main idea and other details. Records words and their meanings in ability, pouvoir to ask for permission
 Answers questions a personal dictionary
 Identifies the sequence of events Uses adverbs of time (demain, hier)
 Writes sentences using the words or
 Tells same story in own words with Identifies the setting and characters Begins to use prepositions that show
 explanations to show the meaning, etc. direction (à), time (à, pendant),
 support Answers and begins to ask some more
 complex questions e.g. Why couldn’t possession (à, de)
 Sequence of story makes sense
 …? What…? How do you think …?
 Vocabulary in context
 Practises Listening and Speaking
 Reads poem/s Words taken from shared or individually
 (Choose one for daily practice) read texts
 Pre-reading: predicts from title and
 Performs a short poem or rhyme or song pictures
 Plays a simple language game Uses reading strategies e.g. uses
 Gives and follows simple instructions / contextual clues
 directions Answers questions about the poem
 Tells own news Expresses feelings stimulated by the
 Recalls events or experiences in the right poem
 sequence Discusses rhyme, words that begin with
 the same sounds and comparisons

 Practises reading
 Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency and expression

 7-8 Takes part in a conversation Designs a poster Working with words
 Asks and answers questions Includes relevant information Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Respects other learners Includes a picture meanings of words

 Listens to them and encourages them to singular and plural forms of nouns

 65
 GRADE 5

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 speak Uses print sizes effectively
 Working with sentences
 Code switches if necessary Presents neat, legible, final draft Develops use of connectors
 Practises Listening and Speaking Writes information text using a frame Uses adverbs of manner (vite, lentement)
 Selects appropriate information
 (Choose one for daily practice) Vocabulary in context
 Performs a short poem or rhyme or song Writes one to two paragraphs Words taken from shared or
 Plays a simple language game Uses correct spelling and punctuation individually read texts

 Gives and follows simple instructions / Uses connectors
 directions Uses the writing process with support
 Tells own news

 9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

3.5.3 GRADE 6

 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Listens to a short story Reads a short story Writes a paragraph with support Working with words
 Uses a frame Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 (Choose from contemporary realistic (Choose from contemporary realistic

 66
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Writes an appropriate opening personal dictionary
 fiction/traditional stories/personal fiction/traditional stories/personal
 sentence with support Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 accounts/adventure/ funny/fantasy/real accounts/adventure/funny / fantasy/real
 Uses connectors words e.g. builds word families based on
 life stories/historical fiction) life stories/historical fiction) how they sound or look.
 Writes an appropriate ending with
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Text from the textbook or reader/s or support Builds on knowledge of sight words and
 Uses appropriate grammar, high frequency words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Answers questions to show Pre-reading with support: predicts from vocabulary, spelling and
 Working with sentences
 understanding title and pictures punctuation
 Understands and uses countable nouns
 Gives a personal response to the story Uses reading strategies e.g. making Uses the writing process with e.g. un livre / des livres
 predictions, uses phonic and Builds on use of personal pronouns (je,
 Practises Listening and Speaking for support
 contextual clues tu, il, elle, nous, ils)
 enrichment Brainstorms ideas
 Discusses new vocabulary from the read Builds on use of subject verb concord e.g.
 Writes a first draft
 (Choose one for daily practice) text Tu aimes / Les filles aiment…
 Revises
 Performs a poem Discusses the title, and where the story Builds on understanding and use of
 takes place (setting) Edits
 Plays a language game tenses
 Answers simple questions on the story Writes final draft
 Gives and follows instructions / directions
 Presents neat, legible final draft Vocabulary in context
 Discusses a topic Practises reading Words taken from shared or individually
 Reads aloud with appropriate Records words and their meanings in read texts
 pronunciation, fluency and expression a personal dictionary
 Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning,
 etc.

 3-4 Sustains a conversation on a familiar Reads a simple descriptive / narrative Writes a simple personal note or Working with words
 topic (e.g. Body and Health) recount message Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Asks and answers questions Reinforces the features of a personal meanings of words
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or

 67
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Respects other learners by listening to note / message Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 them Uses a frame and first letters of a word to find words in
 Pre-reading with support : predicts from
 a dictionary.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for title and pictures Directs message at appropriate person
 Breaks long words into smaller chunks
 enrichment Uses reading strategies e.g. making Edits own writing with support by
 e.g. gar-çon; a-ni-mal
 predictions, uses pictures / phonic and correcting grammar, punctuation and
 (Choose one for daily practice) contextual clues spelling errors Working with sentences
 Performs a poem
 Discusses new vocabulary from the read Revises un/une/des and le/la/l’/les with
 Uses the writing process with
 Plays a language game text nouns.
 support
 Discusses a familiar topic Answers simple questions on text Builds on understanding and use of
 Brainstorms ideas
 tenses
 Does comprehension activity on the Writes a first draft
 Builds on the use of adverbs and
 text (oral or written) Revises adjectives
 Reflects on texts read during Edits
 Vocabulary in context
 independent/pair reading Writes final draft
 Words taken from shared or individually
 Shares opinions on the text Presents neat, legible final draft read texts
 Records words and their meanings in
 a personal dictionary
 Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning,
 etc.

 5-6 Listens to a story Reads a text Writes for personal reflection e.g. a Working with words
 diary using a frame Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 (Choose from contemporary realistic (Choose from contemporary /traditional
 Introduce and discuss the features of personal dictionary
 fiction/traditional stories/personal stories/personal accounts/adventure/real
 the diary Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 accounts/adventure//real life stories) life stories) e.g. a diary/diary entries and first letters of a word to find words in
 Uses the frame

 68
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Uses an informal style a dictionary.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Tells the events in order
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Working with sentences
 Pre-reading with support: predicts from Uses connectors Builds on use of personal pronoun ( je, tu,
 Summarises story with support in a
 title and pictures Uses appropriate grammar, spelling, il, elle, nous, ils)
 frame
 Uses reading strategies with support e.g. punctuation Understands and uses verbs to describe
 Understands basic questions
 makes predictions, uses phonic and actions
 Records words and their meanings in
 Practises Listening and Speaking for contextual clues Builds on use of prepositions that show
 a personal dictionary
 enrichment Discusses new vocabulary from the read position (sur, sous, au-dessous)
 Writes sentences using the words or
 text Uses connectors to show addition: et and
 (Choose one for daily practice) explanations to show the meaning,
 Answers questions on text etc. sequence: (puis, avant)
 Performs a poem or a part of a story
 Uses question forms (qui, qu’est-ce que,
 Plays a language game Practises reading
 quand, quel, pourquoi, comment)
 Discusses a familiar topic Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency, pacing and Capital letters for proper nouns, for titles
 expression and initials of people

 Reflects on texts read during Vocabulary in context
 Words taken from shared or individually
 independent/pair reading
 read texts
 Discusses own feelings

 7-8 Listens to and discusses basic Reads procedural text e.g. instructions Completes visual text e.g. diagrams / Working with words
 instructions pictures / graphs / photographs Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 with visuals e.g. diagrams / pictures /
 Responds physically to simple meanings of words
 graphs / photographs / drawings /drawings
 instructions Adds correct labels The letter C can be pronounced in one of
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or two ways:
 Uses connectors Includes relevant information  1. Soft pronunciation - In front of
 Uses the correct order Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) an E, I, or Y the C is pronounced like an
 Uses key words
 Pre-reading with support: predicts from S: listen
 Practises Listening and Speaking for  2. Hard pronunciation - In front of

 69
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 title, pictures and headings an A, O, U, or a consonant, C is prounced
 enrichment Records words and their meanings in
 like a K
 Uses reading strategies with support
 (Choose one for daily practice) a personal dictionary
 Discusses some visual features Working with sentences
 Performs a poem or song or a part of a Writes sentences using the words or
 Interprets information in the visual text Uses the command form of the verb
 story explanations to show the meaning,
 Follows instructions etc. Begins to use determiners such as un,
 Plays a language game
 deux, etc. and premier, deuxième,
 Practises reading
 Gives and follows instructions / directions dernier.
 Reads aloud with appropriate
 Discusses a topic Uses of the different negative forms
 pronunciation, fluency, pacing and
 expression e.g. Je n'ai jamais rien dit
 Ils ne mangent plus rien.
 Does comprehension activity on the
 Uses “devoir” to show necessity
 text (oral or written)
 Begins to use prepositions that show
 Does a word puzzle for enrichment direction (à), time (à, pendant),
 Uses relevant vocabulary possession (à, de)
 Spells words correctly
 Explains meanings of words/uses them Understands and uses negative forms
 in a sentence
 Vocabulary in context
 Words taken from shared or individually
 read texts
 Synonyms (words that are similar in
 meaning e.g. un ami / un copain)

 70
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 9-10 Listens to poems/songs Reads poems Writes a description of a person / an Working with words
 object / animal / plant / place Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 Selects appropriate content personal dictionary
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF)
 Uses an oral description to identify Discusses topic and main idea Focuses on physical description Working with sentences
 people or objects Understands in a simple way some Writes creatively, using adjectives and Understands and uses of the possessive
 elements of poetry e.g. rhyme, adverbs form of the noun e.g. les yeux de Sylvie
 Plays a language game for enrichment
 alliteration Edits own writing, correcting spelling Uses different types of adjectives
 Gives and follows instructions correctly
 Discusses new vocabulary from the read errors Builds on the uses of tenses
 Takes turns
 text
 Records words and their meanings in Vocabulary in context
 Completes the game in the time
 Uses a dictionary
 allocated a personal dictionary Words taken from shared or individually
 Does comprehension activity on the Writes sentences using the words or read texts
 explanations to show the meaning, Compound words e.g. un taille-crayon
 text (oral or written)
 etc.
 Practises reading
 Reads aloud with appropriate Uses the writing process with support
 pronunciation, fluency and expression Brainstorms ideas
 Writes a first draft
 Revises
 Edits
 Writes final draft
 Presents neat, legible final draft

 71
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a simple story using a frame Working with words
 Uses story structure as a frame Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 (Choose from contemporary realistic Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Writes an appropriate opening sentence personal dictionary
 fiction/traditional stories/personal Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Pre-reading: reads and discusses title Uses connectors Working with sentences
 accounts/adventure/ funny/fantasy/real
 and looks at pictures Uses some adjectives Understands and uses uncountable
 life stories/historical fiction)
 Uses reading strategies e.g. makes Writes an appropriate ending nouns e.g. des vacances / des bagages
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or predictions, using contextual clues Stays on the topic Builds on use of demonstrative pronouns
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Discusses new vocabulary (celui-ci, celui-là, ceux-ci, ceux-là)
 Links sentences into a coherent
 Answers literal questions Identifies sequence of events, setting paragraph using pronouns, connectors Builds on use of adjectives before nouns
 Notes relevant information and characters (e.g. describes and correct punctuation e.g. le petit chien
 Tells and retells stories characters’ feelings, and talks about Uses appropriate grammar, spelling and Begins to use irregular forms of some
 reasons for their actions) punctuation verbs e.g. je prends, nous prenons
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Builds on understanding and use of
 Expresses cause and effect Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 enrichment Uses a dictionary meanings of words present tense

 (Choose one for daily practice) Begins to use “je dois”, “je devrais” and
 Does comprehension activity on the Writes a paragraph to express and
 Performs a poem “il faut” to show obligation.
 text (oral or written) explain an opinion
 Plays a language game Vocabulary in context
 Writes 2 to 3 sentences
 Gives and follows instructions / directions Practises reading Words taken from shared or individually
 Selects relevant information
 Reads aloud with appropriate read texts
 Discusses a topic
 pronunciation, fluency and expression Gives own personal opinion
 Explains sensibly
 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading Records words and their meanings in
 Gives opinions and relates books to own a personal dictionary

 72
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 life Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 Uses the writing process with support
 Brainstorms ideas
 Writes a first draft
 Revises
 Edits
 Writes final draft
 Presents neat, legible final draft

 3-4 Listens to oral descriptions of objects/ Reads information texts e.g. from other Writes a Working with words
 animals/ plants/ places subjects. description/paragraph/sentences of Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 meanings of words
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s objects / animals/plants/places
 Includes relevant, specific details Reinforce singular and plural forms
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF)
 Identifies what it is Pre-reading: discusses the topic with Describes physical appearance Working with sentences
 Describes what it is for support and revises key vocabulary Uses correct determiners Uses nouns that have only plurals e.g.
 Reads a paragraph and identifies main Uses relevant vocabulary des ciseaux, des vacances
 Distinguishes parts from the whole
 idea and topic sentence Punctuation is correct Begins to use possessive pronouns (le
 Draws and label it
 Answers questions on text and visuals mien/la mienne, le tien/la tienne, le
 Uses vocabulary relating to other Drafts writing, gets feedback, edits and
 e.g. graphs, diagrams, tables sien/la sienne)
 subjects rewrites
 Uses different types of adjectives
 Reflects on texts read during Designs, draws and labels visual text
 Practises Listening and Speaking Uses adverbs of manner (vite,
 independent/pair reading e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps/ lentement)
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 Summarises what they have read in a Develops understanding and use of
 Performs a poem maps/pictures/graphs/ plans
 few sentences connectors showing addition, sequence
 Uses information from a written or visual
 Plays a language game

 73
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Gives and follows instructions / directions text and contrast.
 Discusses a topic Includes specific details
 Vocabulary in context
 Uses key words and phrases Words taken from shared or individually
 Uses appropriate vocabulary read texts

 Records words and their meanings in
 a personal dictionary
 Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 Uses the writing process with support
 Brainstorms ideas
 Writes a first draft
 Revises
 Edits
 Writes final draft
 Presents neat, legible final draft

 74
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 5-6 Listens to a personal recount of an Reads stories Writes a simple personal letter Working with words
 event (Choose from contemporary realistic Introduce features of the informal letter Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Identifies most important ideas and fiction/traditional stories/personal Uses a frame personal dictionary
 people accounts/adventure/funny/fantasy/real Uses an informal style Working with sentences
 Answers questions about what happened life stories/historical fiction) Writes at least two short paragraphs Uses regular forms of the verb e.g. Je
 first, second, etc, recounting the same marche./ J’ai marché.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Uses new vocabulary and punctuation
 event
 learnt Uses forms of the verb être and the verb
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Role-plays some familiar situations Pre-reading: predicts with support from Uses appropriate grammar, spelling, avoir
 Uses appropriate language and actions title and pictures punctuation and spaces between Uses adverbs of frequency e.g. Elle
 Organises content sensibly Reads for detail and uses contextual paragraphs parle souvent.
 clues to find meaning Begins to use connectors to show
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Uses the writing process with support
 Understands the vocabulary contrast (mais), reason (parce que) and
 Brainstorms ideas
 enrichment Answers basic questions on the story purpose (pour).
 (e.g. message and setting) Writes a first draft
 (Choose one for daily practice) Vocabulary in context
 Practises reading Revises
 Performs a poem Words taken from shared or individually
 Reads aloud with appropriate Edits
 Plays a language game read texts
 pronunciation, fluency and expression Writes final draft
 Tells or retells stories Antonyms (words that are opposite in
 Reads personal and social texts e.g. a Presents neat, legible final draft
 meaning e.g. fort/doux)
 personal diary or letter
 Records words and their meanings in
 Comments on main ideas
 Reads for detail and notices informal a personal dictionary
 style Writes sentences using the words or
 Comments on format and salutation explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 Relates reading to own life

 75
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 7-8 Carries out a class survey e.g. Reads information text with visuals Develops a simple questionnaire Working with words
 interviews class mates, recording e.g. timetables and television Writes questions clearly Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Leaves space for answers meanings of words
 responses on a chart or graph schedules/charts/tables/ diagrams/mind
 Asks and answers questions Uses the question form correctly Words with nasal vowels: e.g. un bon vin
 maps/maps/pictures/graphs
 Handles interviews politely Writes a paragraph to express and Working with sentences
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Records information accurately Extends use of the verbs être and avoir
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) explain an opinion
 Uses the structure correctly Writes 3-4 sentences with support Builds on understanding and use of
 Pre-reading: discusses the topic and
 Uses key words and phrases future tense
 revises key vocabulary Selects relevant information
 Begins to use “je dois”, “je devrais” and
 Sustains a conversation on a familiar Reads a paragraph and identifies main Gives own personal opinion
 “il faut” to show obligation.
 idea and topic sentence Explains sensibly
 topic for enrichment Begins to use adverbs
 Answers questions on text and visuals
 Listens to and gives other learners a Uses the writing process with support
 chance to speak Scans for specific information Vocabulary in context
 Brainstorms ideas
 Asks and answers questions Words taken from shared or individually
 Does comprehension activity on the Writes a first draft read texts
 Gives an opinion e.g. Why do you text (oral or written) Revises Antonyms (words that are opposite in
 think…?
 Practises reading Edits meaning e.g. fort/doux)
 Reads aloud with appropriate Writes final draft
 pronunciation, fluency and expression Presents neat, legible final draft

 Solves word puzzles for enrichment Records words and their meanings in
 Uses relevant vocabulary
 a personal dictionary
 Spells words correctly Writes sentences using the words or
 Explains meanings of words/uses them explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 in a sentence
 Uses a dictionary

 Reflects on texts read during

 76
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 independent/pair reading
 Compares books and texts read

 9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Listens to oral descriptions of Reads a story Writes diary entries Working with words
 places/animals/ plants /objects/etc Selects appropriate content for the topic Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Uses the appropriate structure as a personal dictionary
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 frame Add s to form most plurals
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Pre-reading: predicts from title and
 pictures Tells the events in the correct order
 Identifies places Working with sentences
 Describes the features of the text Uses connectors Builds on use of proper nouns e.g. with
 Notes relevant information e.g. on a chart
 Uses reading strategies e.g. uses Uses appropriate grammar, spelling, capital letter
 / table
 contextual clues to determine meaning, punctuation and spaces between Builds on the use of tenses
 Identifies similarities and differences paragraphs
 makes inferences Uses futur simple to indicate something
 Practises Listening and Speaking for that will happen e.g. Il y aura un orage
 Uses the writing process with support

 77
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Answers questions about the story Brainstorms ideas aujourd’hui.
 enrichment
 Identifies and discusses the setting and Writes a first draft Begins to use connectors to show cause-
 (Choose one for daily practice) characters and-effect (pour que)
 Revises
 Performs a poem
 Describes cause and effect in a story e.g. Edits Vocabulary in context
 Plays a language game What happened when…? Or Why do
 Writes final draft Words taken from shared or individually
 Gives and follows instructions / directions you think ... happened?
 Presents neat, legible final draft read texts
 Recounts experiences or events in the
 Reads simple personal letters for Synonyms (words that are similar in
 right sequence, using connectors Records words and their meanings in
 enrichment meaning e.g. un ami / un copain)
 a personal dictionary
 Identifies main ideas
 Writes sentences using the words or
 Answers literal questions
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Identifies features of text e.g. date,
 salutation

 3-4 Listens to a simple talk on an issue Reads information texts with visuals Writes information text using visuals Working with words
 Asks and answers simple questions e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps/ e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps/ Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Discusses the main idea meanings of words
 maps/pictures/graphs. maps/ pictures/graphs
 Gives opinions Working with sentences
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Respects other learners by listening to Uses the gender forms of some nouns
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 them e.g. un chien / une chienne
 Pre-reading: scans for important details Reads selected text
 Builds on use of adjectives before nouns
 Talks about an issue after preparation Asks questions Uses information from the text to draw
 e.g. le petit chien
 Selects appropriate topic and content and label visual text e.g. tables or
 Selects relevant details to answer
 Builds on use of subject verb concord
 Stays on topic questions charts or graphs
 e.g. Tu aimes / Les filles aiment…
 Organises content logically Makes a mind map summary of the Transfers text into graphic form e.g. Builds on the use of tenses
 text/selection of the text
 uses notes of information collected
 Vocabulary in context
 Does comprehension activity on the Transfers information into graphic form

 78
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 e.g. a graph or table Words taken from shared or individually
 text (oral or written)
 Analyses information read texts
 Practises reading Words belonging to the same lexical field
 Reads aloud with appropriate Writes a short report in a frame on e.g. une couverture and une page
 pronunciation, fluency and expression information collected belong to the lexical field un livre
 Evaluates with support the information
 Uses an appropriate structure for the
 report

 5-6 Listens to a song/simple poems Reads poems or songs Writes a simple passage / paragraph Working with words
 Pre-reading: predicts from title and using the writing process with support Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 pictures Selects interesting content personal dictionary
 Resource File (TRF)
 Uses reading strategies e.g. uses Uses the story structure as a frame Shortening words e.g. une télévision /
 Recalls main idea
 contextual clues une télé
 Discusses central idea Uses a beginning, middle and end
 Answers questions about the poem
 Tells events in appropriate order Working with sentences
 Relates to own experience
 Expresses feelings stimulated by the Revises un/une/des and le/la/l’/les with
 Identifies rhyme Uses an appropriate tense and co-
 poem nouns.
 ordinates sentences with “et” and
 Expresses feelings stimulated by the Discusses rhyme “mais” Builds on use of personal pronouns (je,
 poem
 Discusses comparisons made in the Uses punctuation, tu, il, elle, nous, ils)
 Performs song/selected lines poem
 Uses appropriate spacing for paragraphs Uses adverbs
 Practises Listening and Speaking Practises reading Begins to use pronouns
 Uses the writing process with support
 (Choose one for daily practice) Reads aloud with expression, showing
 Brainstorms ideas using e.g. mind maps Vocabulary in context
 Performs a poem understanding
 Writes first draft Words taken from shared or individually
 Plays a language game Reads aloud using proper pronunciation, read texts
 pacing and volume. Gets feedback on content and use of
 Gives and follows instructions / directions grammar and vocabulary Joining prefixes or suffixes to a base
 Discusses a topic Reflects on texts read during word
 Checks spelling

 79
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Writes final draft
 independent/pair reading
 Relates texts to own life For enrichment:

 Writes for fun e.g. simple four line poem
 or rhyming sentences
 Chooses topic
 Writes rhyming sentences on topic
 Uses one comparison

 Records words and their meanings in
 a personal dictionary
 Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 7-8 Listens to and carries out instructions Reads procedural text e.g. Makes a mind map / summary of a Working with words
 e.g. a procedure recipe/instructions (e.g. folding a paper short text with a frame Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Predicts what might come next Identifies at least three main points meanings of words
 box)
 Discusses specific details of text Organises information neatly Words which are often confused e.g.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or ces/ses, mais/mes
 Discusses sequence of instructions Uses appropriate symbols
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Discusses the form of the verb used /diagrams/other relevant graphic text Working with sentences
 Pre-reading: predicts from title and
 Uses appropriate vocabulary Understands and uses of the possessive
 Practises Listening and Speaking for headings
 Checks spelling form of the noun e.g. les yeux de Sylvie
 Interprets visuals
 enrichment Uses different types of adjectives
 Answers questions about the text Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 (Choose one for daily practice) meanings of words Understands and uses verbs to describe
 Discusses what needs to be done
 Performs a poem actions
 Discusses sequence of instructions Uses the writing process with support
 Plays a language game Build on the use of tenses
 Follows the instructions Brainstorms ideas using e.g. mind maps

 80
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Gives and follows instructions / directions Writes first draft
 Reflects on texts read during Vocabulary in context
 Discusses a topic Checks spelling Words taken from shared or individually
 independent/pair reading
 Describes features of some of texts read Writes final draft read texts

 Records words and their meanings in
 a personal dictionary
 Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 9-10 Participates in conversation on a Reads a role play Writes a short dialogue, using a more Working with words
 familiar topic ( e.g. The Weather) informal style of writing (in a frame) Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Selects appropriate characters meanings of words
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Develops the conversation and action Builds on phonic knowledge to spell
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Pre-reading predicting from title
 logically words e.g. builds word families based on
 Asks relevant questions and responds to Uses reading strategies how they sound or look.
 questions Uses direct speech
 Identifies the story-line
 Uses appropriate punctuation e.g. colon, Working with sentences
 Sustains the conversation Discusses characters, setting and action
 exclamation and question marks Begins to use determiners: un, deux, etc.
 Expresses opinions Expresses feelings stimulated by the text
 Uses writing process with support and premier, deuxième, dernier,etc.
 Respects others’ ideas Discusses features of the text especially
 Brainstorms ideas using mind maps Uses different types of adjectives
 Encourages other learners to speak the punctuation and format including those relating to temperature
 additional language Produces first draft
 Does comprehension activity on the Uses different types of adjectives
 Gets feedback and revises
 Performs simple role plays including those relating to age
 text (oral or written) Proofreads
 Uses appropriate content and language Vocabulary in context
 Practises reading Writes final draft
 Uses direct speech Words taken from shared or individually
 Reads aloud with expression, showing Presents neat, legible final draft with
 Develops sensible story line understanding of the text read texts
 correct spacing
 Uses voice and expression and gestures Reads aloud using proper pronunciation,
 Records words and their meanings in

 81
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 to convey meaning pacing and volume.
 a personal dictionary
 Pronounces words audibly and correctly Writes sentences using the words or
 Reflects on texts read during
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 independent/pair reading
 Presents a short oral book report with
 appropriate content and structure
 Gives own opinion

 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a simple story / passage Working with words
 Uses story structure as a frame Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 (Choose from contemporary realistic Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Uses language imaginatively especially a personal dictionary
 fiction/traditional stories/personal Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 variety of vocabulary Builds on knowledge of sight words and
 accounts/adventure/funny/fantasy/real Pre-reading: predicts from the title and
 Links sentences into a coherent high frequency words
 pictures
 life stories/historical fiction) paragraph using pronouns, connectors
 Uses reading strategies: uses contextual Working with sentences
 and correct punctuation
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or clues to find the meaning of new words Understands and uses countable nouns
 Uses appropriate grammar, spelling and e.g.un livre/des livres
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Discusses setting and characters

 82
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Asks relevant questions and responds to Discusses the sequence of events, punctuation Builds on use of demonstrative pronouns
 questions answering questions about what Uses correct tense consistently (celui-ci, celui-là, ceux-ci, ceux-là)
 Answers simple and begins to ask and happened first, second, etc. Builds on use of adjectives before nouns
 Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 answer more complex questions e.g. Asks and answers more complex meanings of words e.g. le petit chien
 Why couldn’t … ?; What…? How do questions e.g. Why couldn’t … ?; Uses adverbs of time (demain, hier)
 you think …? What…? How do you think …? Uses the writing process with support
 Begins to use prepositions that show
 Brainstorms ideas
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Does comprehension activity on the direction (à), time (à, pendant),
 Writes a first draft possession (à, de)
 enrichment text (oral or written)
 Revises
 Reads personal letters (for Vocabulary in context
 (Choose one for daily practice) Edits
 Performs a poem Words taken from shared or individually
 enrichments) Writes final draft read texts
 Plays a language game Pre-reading: predicts based on skimming Presents neat, legible final draft Antonyms (words that are opposite in
 Gives and follows instructions/ directions the text
 Records words and their meanings in meaning e.g. fort/doux)
 Discusses a topic Uses reading strategies: uses contextual
 clues to find the meaning of new words a personal dictionary
 Identifies main idea and specific details Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Discusses the purpose of the letter
 Discusses the format of the letter

 Practises reading
 Reads aloud with expression, showing
 understanding
 Reads aloud using proper pronunciation,
 pacing and volume

 3-4 Listens to and discusses a talk Reads information text Uses information from a visual text Working with words
 Discusses main ideas and specific Text from the textbook or reader/s or e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/mind maps/ Uses the dictionary to check spelling and

 83
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 details meanings of words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) maps/ pictures/ graphs to write a text
 Records specific information on a chart Pre-reading: reads and discusses Writes two to three paragraphs Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 or mind map headings and pictures and first letters of a word to find words
 Spelling and punctuation are correct
 in a dictionary.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Notices the role that pictures and
 photographs play in constructing Writes visual information text
 enrichment Working with sentences
 meaning Makes a mind map summary of a short
 Begins to use possessive pronouns (le
 (Choose one for daily practice) text with support
 Answers questions about the text mien/la mienne, le tien/la tienne, le
 Performs a poem Organises advantages and sien/la sienne)
 Summarises a paragraph with support
 Plays a language game disadvantages into a table
 Builds on understanding and use of
 Does comprehension activity on the present tense
 Gives and follows instructions/ directions Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 Discusses a topic text (oral or written) Uses connectors to show addition: et and
 meanings of words
 Practises reading sequence (puis, avant)
 Records words and their meanings in
 Reads aloud with appropriate Analyses simple sentences into subject,
 pronunciation, fluency and expression a personal dictionary verb, object e.g. Amélie - lit - son livre
 Writes sentences using the words or Understands and uses reported speech.
 Reflects on texts read during explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Uses relative clauses e.g. La fille qui est
 independent/pair reading
 blonde est ma soeur.
 Expresses emotional response to texts
 Uses commas for separating nouns in a
 read
 list
 Relates text to own life
 Uses quotation marks for direct speech

 Vocabulary in context
 Words taken from shared or individually
 read texts

 5-6 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a book review Working with words
 Selects appropriate content and structure Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 (Choose from fiction/traditional Text from the textbook or reader/s or

 84
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Expresses and explains own opinion meanings of words
 stories/personal accounts/adventure/ Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Pre-reading: predicts from the title and Includes title, characters and summary Words belonging to the same lexical field
 funny/fantasy/real life stories/historical
 pictures e.g. couverture and page belong to the
 fiction) Writes a personal letter lexical field livre
 Uses reading strategies: uses contextual Selects appropriate content
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or clues to find the meaning of new words Working with sentences
 Uses a frame only if necessary
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Discusses plot, setting and characters Uses question forms: qui, qu’est-ce que,
 Addresses the message correctly
 Asks relevant questions and responds to Discusses the sequence of events, quand, quel, pourquoi, comment
 questions Orders the information logically
 answering questions about what Develops use of connectors showing
 Summarises the story happened first, second, etc. Writes own name at the end reason and purpose.
 Answers and begins to ask and answer Asks and answers more complex Uses an informal style of writing Begins to use connectors to show choice
 more complex questions e.g. Why questions e.g. Why couldn’t … ?; appropriate for the purpose e.g; soit…soit…..
 couldn’t … ?; What…? How do you What…? How do you think …? Future tense e.g. Je le verrai demain./Je
 Uses the writing process
 think …? Expresses and explains own opinion vais le voir demain
 Brainstorms ideas
 Expresses an opinion, giving a reason for Builds on understanding and use of
 Does comprehension activity on the Writes a first draft
 it e.g. on ethical, social and critical present tense
 issues in a story, code switching if text (oral or written) Revises
 necessary Edits Vocabulary in context
 Reads poems
 Uses tenses introduced in the earlier Writes final draft Words taken from shared or individually
 Pre-reading: predicts from title and
 grades e.g. past and future read texts
 pictures Presents neat, legible final draft

 Listens to a poem/s Uses reading strategies e.g. uses Uses the dictionary to check spelling and
 contextual clues meanings of words
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 Answers questions about the poem Records words and their meanings in
 Resource File (TRF)
 Expresses feelings stimulated by the a personal dictionary
 Recalls main idea
 poem
 Discusses central idea Writes sentences using the words or
 Discusses rhyme and alliteration explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Relates to own experience
 Discusses comparisons made in the
 Identifies rhyme and words that begin poem (similes)

 85
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 with the same sounds (alliteration)
 Practises reading
 Identifies and discusses comparisons Reads aloud with expression, showing
 (e.g. similes) understanding
 Expresses feelings stimulated by the Reads aloud using proper pronunciation,
 poem pacing and volume
 Performs song/selected lines

 Practises Listening and Speaking Reflects on texts read during

 (Choose one for daily practice) independent/pair reading
 Performs a poem Does a structured book review with good
 oral presentation
 Plays a language game
 Gives and follows instructions/
 directions
 Discusses a topic
 Recounts events or experiences in the
 right sequence, answering questions
 about what happened first, second,
 third, etc

 7-8 Takes part in a conversation (e. g. Reads media texts e.g. magazine Writes a simple paragraph/passage Working with words
 Role models) article/news report. using a frame Spells familiar words correctly, using a
 Asks and answers questions Includes relevant information personal dictionary
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Respects other learners Includes a clear main idea Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) and first letters of a word to find words
 Listens to other learners and encourages Develops information logically
 Pre-reading: predicts what text is about in a dictionary.

 86
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 them to speak by previewing it Uses connectors and organises
 Working with sentences
 Uses a range of reading strategies e.g. paragraphs properly
 Participates in discussion Uses devoir to show necessity
 skimming, scanning Uses the correct format
 Imagines and describes possibilities Begins to use connectors to show
 Answers questions Uses appropriate grammar, vocabulary, condition
 Uses the conditional
 Discusses main ideas and specific spelling and punctuation
 Takes turns Uses comparatives (aussi … que, plus …
 details que, moins... que)
 Respects others’ opinions Designs a poster for enrichment
 Discusses the layout and design of the Includes relevant information Uses question marks
 Encourages others to speak
 text
 Includes a picture Uses exclamation marks
 Practises Listening and Speaking Compares layout and design to that of
 Uses the correct format
 newspaper Vocabulary in context
 (Choose one for daily practice) Uses design features such as colour and Words taken from shared or individually
 Performs a poem Does comprehension activity on the different sizes or kinds of print (font) read texts
 Plays a language game text (oral or written) Presents neat, legible, final draft Compound words e.g. un taille-crayon
 Gives and follows instructions/directions
 Practises reading Uses the writing process with support
 Discusses a topic
 Reads aloud with appropriate Writes first draft
 pronunciation, fluency and expression Revises

 Reads and understands graphic Proofreads
 Writes final draft
 media text e.g. posters and
 Presents neat, legible final draft
 advertisements
 Pre-reading: discusses pictures Records words and their meanings in
 Interprets the information a personal dictionary
 Discusses the purpose of the text Writes sentences using the words or
 Discusses some of the language use explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Identifies and discusses design features
 such as colour and different sizes or
 kinds of print (font)
 Discusses the layout

 87
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Compares different texts e.g. posters and
 advertisements

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 Shares opinions on texts

 9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 88
 SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT IN THE SECOND ADDITIONAL
LANGUAGE
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the
performance of learners, using various forms of assessment. It involves four steps: generating and collecting evidence
of achievement; evaluating this evidence; recording the findings and using this information to understand and thereby
assist the learner’s development in order to improve the process of learning and teaching.

Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning). In both cases
regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance the learning experience.

The Second Additional Language learners’ success depends on regular, informal assessment and feedback from the
teacher as they engage with the texts and activities. The teaching plan sets out the required content, skills and
strategies for teaching and learning over a year. This is what will be assessed at increasing levels of development
(progression). Not everything taught needs to be formally assessed. However, it is essential that learners’ progress is
assessed through both a formal and an informal assessment programme, as this informs planning.

Learners’ listening skills, oral competence, ability to answer questions, participation in discussions and written
recording skills where necessary should be observed on a daily basis.

It is important, too, that learners’ understanding of what they are reading is assessed and not just their ability to
recognise or decode words. Assessment of reading should therefore also take place regularly and not just be a once-
off assessment. Formal reading assessment should focus on reading aloud as well as activities which help a teacher
to determine how much the learner has understood, for example, retelling a story or answering questions.

Assessment of written work will focus primarily on the learner’s ability to convey meaning, as well as how correctly
they have written, for example, correct Language Structures and Conventions, spelling and punctuation. All
assessment should recognise that language learning is a process and that learners will not produce a completely
correct piece of work the first time round. Therefore the various stages in the writing process should also be
introduced.

When giving a formal assessment task, there will be a focus on a particular skill, for example Listening and Speaking,
or Reading or Writing. However, because language learning is an integrated process, more than one skill will be used.
The language structures should be assessed in context. It must be ensured that assessment is not only done as
written work, but allows for practical and oral work too. It is important to assess what learners understand and not
what they can just memorise, so assess skills in context as much as possible e.g. learners may spell all their words
correctly during a test on Friday, but are they able to use those same words correctly spelt when writing/ recording
their personal news or a story?

Teaching and assessment of languages should make provision for inclusion of all learners, and strategies should be
found to assist all learners to access or produce language texts. Some students experiencing barriers may not be able
to attain some of the aims as they are presented in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement.

4.2 INFORMAL OR DAILY ASSESSMENT
Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on a learner’s achievement that can be
used to improve their learning.

Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations, discussions,
 89
 practical demonstrations, learner-teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, etc. Informal assessment may
be as simple as stopping during the lesson to observe learners or to discuss with learners how learning is progressing.
Assessment of language competence will be in the form of observation, written exercises, oral activities and
presentations, written tests, reading aloud and other forms of assessment. Informal assessment should be used to
provide feedback to the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but need not be recorded. It should not be seen
as separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom. Many of the learning activities may be used to
assess learners’ performance informally. In some cases, teachers might want to set specific assessment types of
activities to motivate learners to learn, such as regular spelling texts. Learners or teachers can mark these
assessment tasks.

It is suggested that teachers use the first two weeks of the term to do a baseline assessment of learners. Use the
activities given in the first two weeks of the teaching plans to do this assessment. This will enable teachers to
establish the kind of attention that learners will need as they proceed.

Self assessment and peer assessment actively involves learners in assessment. This is important as it allows learners
to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily assessment tasks are not formally
recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. Teachers may however wish to keep their own informal records of how
individual learners are progressing in the different aspects of the subject to assist with planning and ensuring that
individual learners develop the required skills and understanding. The results of daily assessment tasks are not taken
into account for promotion and certification purposes.

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT
All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as Formal
Assessment. Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and
certification purposes. All Formal Assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance
and to ensure that appropriate standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a
grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, oral presentations,
demonstrations (such as retelling a story, matching), performances (such as role play), paragraphs/passages
participation in oral tasks (such as dialogues, conversations, discussions), written tasks (such as completing a
worksheet, writing paragraphs or other types of texts), etc. Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal
Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject. While preparations for formal assessment tasks could be done
outside the classroom, the final version should be done under controlled conditions, in the classroom.

Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject.

Formal assessment tasks must assess not only learners’ knowledge and skill but also their use of the language in
context.

In formal assessment, use memoranda, rubrics, checklists and rating scales as well as other appropriate assessment
tools to observe, assess and record learners’ levels of understanding and skill. Choose an assessment tool that is
most appropriate for the type of activity. For example, a rubric is more suitable than a memorandum for a creative
writing piece. A memorandum is better suited to a spelling test or a reading comprehension activity.

The formal assessment requirements for Second Additional Language are as follows:

One formal assessment tasks for the first and third terms must be completed and one in the fourth term, totalling five
in all for the school year. These five formal assessment tasks make up 75% of the total mark for Second Additional
Language in Grades 4, 5 and 6. This formal assessment mark will include the mid-year test or examination, if this is
given.
 90
 The first formal assessment task in each term should be done in the middle of the term. The mid-year test formal
assessment task in term 2 should be done towards the end of the term.

There will be an examination at the year-end which will count for 25% of the mark.

Each formal assessment task should be made up of activities that assess Listening and Speaking, Reading, Writing,
and Language Structures and Conventions, and should take place over a period of days. Language Structures and
Conventions should be assessed in context.

Formal assessment tasks must assess a range of aspects of the language skills so that key aspects will be assessed
over the course of the term and the year. Ensure that these aspects have been informally assessed and feedback
given to the learner before they are formally assessed.

All assessment in the Intermediate Phase is internal.

The forms of assessment used should be age and developmental level appropriate. The design of these tasks should
cover the content of the subject and include a variety of tasks designed to achieve the objectives of the subject.

Formal assessment tasks

Each formal assessment task should cover the following aspects and have the following weighting. It should be based
on the knowledge and skills done during that term. The examples given below are merely to illustrate the kind of
activity that should be set. Use the term plans for each grade to select the kind of activities and the set of skills
required for each part of the formal assessment task.

Requirements for the compilation of a task are given in percentages. Where thirty percent for a language skill is
indicated, it means that the final allocation of marks for that language skill should be thirty percent of the total and not
thirty marks. Schools are not limited to a number of marks allocated to a language skill as long as the weighting for
each language skill is observed for each task according to the percentage allocated. In grade four for example, a
language knowledge test may be set for ten marks or more, as long as the final weighting does not exceed the
weighting indicated.

In Writing parts of the planning process or the whole process should be assessed at least once per term. The lengths
of texts for writing as indicated in Section 3.4 should be strictly adhered to.

 Composition of a formal assessment task (FAT) Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 Listening and Speaking 40 % 40 % 40 %

 Listening An activity to show that the learner has listened and 20 % 20 % 20 %
 understood e.g. listen and follow instructions/listen to a
 text and answer questions about it, orally or in writing

 Speaking An activity to show that the learner can express 20 % 20 % 20 %
 him/herself orally e.g. take part in a conversation or
 dialogue/discuss a topic or text/give instructions or
 directions/perform a poem/give a short talk

 OR

 One or more combined Listening and Speaking 40% 40% 40%

 91
 activities to demonstrate ability to understand and
 express oral language e.g. listen to and retell a
 story/listen to a talk and discuss it

 Reading 30% 30% 30%%

Reading aloud An activity to show that the learner can read fluently 10% 10% 10%
 e.g. read aloud from a familiar text (Terms 1 to 4)/read
 aloud from an unfamiliar text (Terms 3 and 4). This
 must include a few questions to determine whether the
 learner has understood what has been read.

Reading Two or more activities to show that the learner can 20% 20% 20%
comprehension understand the meaning of the text and recognises
 features of the text e.g. answer questions/retell a
 story/make up own ending/give a summary/give own
 opinion/describe features of the text. Texts used may
 be short extracts or extended reading texts read during
 independent reading. The activity must suit the type of
 text chosen.

 Writing 20% 20% 20%

Creative writing One activity to show the learner can express ideas 10% 10% 10%
 creatively in writing e.g. writes a particular creative text
 type (or a short paragraph/passage) or part of it or
 sentences. The activity must show use of language
 structures in context.

Informational/ One activity to show the learner can give information in 10% 10% 10%
Transactional writing writing e.g. writes a particular social or functional text
 type (such as a report/poster/ labelling
 diagrams/sentences/simple dialogues) or part of it.
 The activity must show use of language structures in
 context.

Language structure 10% 10% 10%
and conventions

Formal language One or more activities to show learner has knowledge 10% 10% 10%
usage of language structures and their use e.g. correct
 punctuation/ spelling/appropriate use of parts of
 speech and sentence structures

 92
 Total percentage for 100% 100% 100%
 each task

4.4 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout
a term. A programme for assessment must be drawn up by the school indicating the dates on which tasks will be
done.

4.4.1 Overview of requirements

The following table provides an overview of the Programme of Assessment requirements for each term for Second
Additional Languages:

Table 4.1: Grades 4 - 6

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4

 FAT 3 / Mid-year
 Grade 4 FAT 1 FAT 2 FAT 4 FAT 5 End-of-year examination
 examination

 FAT 3 / Mid-year
 Grade 5 FAT 1 FAT 2 FAT 4 FAT 5 End-of-year examination
 examination

 FAT 3 / Mid-year
 Grade 6 FAT 1 FAT 2 FAT 4 FAT 5 End-of-year examination
 examination

 Composition End-of-year examination
 Continuous assessment 75%
 of final mark 25%

4.4.2 Examinations

Content for the end-of-year examination should be drawn from the work done for the year and should be a selection of
skills and activities that will enable the learner to show that he/she is ready to engage with the work in the next year.

The examination will consist of the following:

Reading comprehension, including vocabulary work

Writing of a short creative text, including appropriate and correct usage of format, grammar, punctuation and spelling

Writing of a short transactional text, including appropriate and correct usage of format, grammar, punctuation and
spelling

Knowledge and understanding of grammar, punctuation and spelling

Listening and Speaking skills will not be assessed as part of the examination as these are best assessed over a

 93
 longer period of time.

The weighting of marks for the examination is as follows:

 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 Reading Comprehension 60% 60% 50%

 Writing 25% 25% 35%

 Language Structures and Conventions 15% 15% 15%

 Total percentage 100% 100% 100%

4.5 RECORDING AND REPORTING
Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific
assessment task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in
the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence
of the learner’s conceptual progression within a grade and her / his readiness to progress or being promoted
to the next grade. Records of learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by
teachers and learners in the teaching and learning process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other stakeholders.
Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’ meetings, school
visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters, etc. Teachers in all
grades report in percentages against the subject. Seven levels of competence have been described for each subject
listed for Grades R - 12. The various achievement levels and their corresponding percentage bands are as shown in
the Table below.

CODES AND PERCENTAGES FOR RECORDING AND REPORTING

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE

 7 Outstanding achievement 80 - 100

 6 Meritorious achievement 70 - 79

 5 Substantial achievement 60 - 69

 4 Adequate achievement 50 - 59

 3 Moderate achievement 40 - 49

 94
 2 Elementary achievement 30 - 39

 1 Not achieved 0 - 29

Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages against the
subject on the learners’ report cards.

4.6 MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT
Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should
be implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation
practices must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

Moderators at school level must give quality comments to ensure that the assessment practice at school is enhanced.
Moderation cannot simply be a monitoring exercise to check that the correct number of tasks has been done or that a
memorandum has been applied correctly. In Languages it means that the moderator will give good comment, among
other things, on the levels of questioning in comprehension testing; the frequency of extended writing; the quality of
assessment instruments and the developmental opportunities afforded, and the teacher’s engagement with learner
workbooks and evidence of learner performance.

The moderation process must also ensure that the ratings given are consistent across all classes in the grade, and all
grades in the phase. For example, a rating of 3 given by one teacher should represent the same level of skill and
knowledge as the same rating given by another teacher. It is therefore important for Subject Heads to do internal
moderation regularly.

4.7 GENERAL
This document should be read in conjunction with:

4.7.1 The National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement, Grades R - 12; and

4.7.2 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R - 12.

 95
 GLOSSARY
acronym – a word made up from the first letters of the name of something e.g. CAPS is an acronym for Curriculum
and Assessment Policy Statement
e.g. ONU : Organisation des Nations Unies
aesthetic – the use of language to create something artistic, fine and beautiful
alliteration – the use of several words together that begin with the same sound or letter e.g. Round the rocks the
ragged rascal ran
e.g. Pour qui sont ces serpents qui sifflent sur vos têtes ?" Jean RACINE, Andromaque

allusion – writing or speaking that mentions a subject, person, etc. indirectly e.g. He alluded to the president’s ill
health
« J'ai eu chaud place de la paix. Dix mille degrés sur la place de la paix » (Allusion à la bombe atomique)—
Marguerite Duras, Hiroshima mon amour

ambiguity – a possible double meaning which may make a message unclear when used by mistake, e.g. I am going
out for the present may mean I am leaving for this time OR I am going to get a gift
e.g. "J'ai perdu mes fils" may mean I lost my son or I lost my reel of threads.
anecdote – a short story of based on personal experience
anti-climax – a situation or event that is less exciting because it happens after something that was much better. In
literature study anti-climax suggests that the expectations built up by the writer are deliberately disappointed.
antonym – a word that is opposite in meaning to another word in the same language e.g. tall and short are antonyms
in English
e.g. grand vs petit
appreciation – pleasure you express when you realize something is good, useful, or well done; an understanding of
the importance or meaning of something
appropriate – correct or suitable for a particular time, situation, or purpose
assonance – repetition of vowel sounds in two or more words, e.g. All is in tune in the world in June
« Tout m'afflige et me nuit et conspire à me nuire » Jean Racine, Phèdre
assumptions – something that you think is true although you have no definite proof. Underlying assumption – a
belief that is used as the basis for an idea, but which may not be correct
bias – an opinion about whether something is good or bad which influences how you deal with it
chronological – arranged according to when things happened or were made, e.g. Les poèmes sont classés par ordre
chronologique. The poems were arranged in chronological order.
clip (video clip/audio clip) – a short part of a film, television or radio programme that is shown by itself, especially as
an advertisement, e.g. une bande-annonce d'un film français/un clip vidéo d'une chanson clips from a French film
cognitive academic skills – these are skills such as inferencing, synthesising and evaluating; the term cognitive
academic language proficiency (CALP) was coined by Jim Cummins to describe abstract, decontextualised,
cognitively demanding language i.e. the kind of language that you would find in a science textbook
coherent – something which makes logical sense; a coherent paragraph has a clear development of ideas and
sentences have logical links
cohesive – a cohesive text is one which flows and has unity. It makes use of connectives, conjunctions and pronouns,
which hold the text together e.g. Punctuation is important because it makes written language easier to understand.
e.g. connecteurs logiques: car / pour, en effet / en conclusion
colloquial – language or words that are used mainly in informal conversations rather than in writing or formal speech,
e.g. just chuck it there (colloquial) instead of please place it there (formal)
e.g. bouffer (to eat - colloquial) instead of manger (formal)
Ça vaut le coup (It's worth it - colloquial) instead of Cela vaut la peine (formal)
conjunctive – in conjunctive writing systems (e.g. isiZulu and isiXhosa) there are spaces between grammatical words
rather than morphemes; words are therefore longer than in disjunctive writing systems (e.g. Sesotho and Setswana)
connotation – the meanings which a word suggests e.g. plump has positive connotations such as attractive,
comfortable, cheerful; whereas fat has more negative connotations
e.g. enrobée (plump) has a positive connotation whereas gras (fat) has more negative connotations
climax – the most exciting, effective or important part of a story, which usually comes near the end
conflict – struggle that arises between characters, between characters and their circumstances or from opposing
desires or values
critical language awareness – the analysis of how meaning is constructed by those in power to maintain their
 96
 position; the analysis of language forms to reveal the mechanics of power-based relationships. It empowers the
learner to resist manipulation and to use language sensitively
critique – a detailed explanation or evaluation of something such as political beliefs
decoding – to discover the meaning of a word or message
decontextualised – taken out of the situation, events, or information related to it
denotation – the literal or straightforward meaning of a word
denouement – the exciting last part of a story or play
disjunctive – in disjunctive writing systems (e.g. Sesotho and Setswana) there are spaces between morphemes;
words are therefore shorter than in conjunctive writing systems (e.g. isiZulu and isiXhosa)
dramatic irony – when the people watching a play know something that the characters do not, and can understand
the real importance or meaning of what is happening
element – one part or feature of a whole system, plan, piece of work etc., especially one that is basic or important
emotive – emotive language is language which arouses strong feelings
euphemism – a polite word or expression that you use instead of a more direct one to avoid shocking or upsetting
someone, e.g. Pass away is a euphemism for die
e.g. Elle nous a quittés. (She passed away) instead of Elle est morte. (She died)
evocative – making people remember something by producing a feeling or memory in them
explicit – clearly or directly stated (as opposed to implicit)
exposure – given the chance to experience new ideas, ways of life, cultures etc.
falling action – refers to events that happen after the climax, where the tension has been released and the story
moves towards its end. This is also known as the denouement
generic – relating to a whole group of things rather than to one thing
genre – a genre is a particular kind of text written with a specific purpose and audience in mind; it has a recognisable
structure and language features. Examples are: novel, drama, poetry, short stories, film, diaries, journals, academic
articles, comics, etc.
homograph – a word that is spelled the same as another, but is different in meaning, origin, grammar, or
pronunciation, e.g. the noun record is a homograph of the verb record
e.g. corner (to make dog-eared) and corner (a corner kick with an English pronunciation)

homonym – a word which has both the same sound and spelling as another word but a different meaning e.g. the
noun bear and the verb to bear
e.g. un avocat (an avocado) and un avocat (a lawyer)
homophone – a word which sounds the same as another but is spelled differently and has a different meaning e.g.
one and won
e.g. vers (toward), vert (green), ver (worm) et verre (glass)
hyperbole – an exaggeration e.g. to describe something so that it appears bigger than it really is, for example, He
gave me a mountainous plate of food.
e.g. Je meurs de faim (I'm dying of hunger)
icon – a small sign or picture on a page or computer screen that is used to indicate or start a particular operation or
activity, e.g. To open a new file, click on the icon.
impact – the effect or influence that an event, situation etc. has on someone or something
implied – meaning that is suggested but not directly stated, e.g. “It’s ten o’clock” may imply that the other is late
e.g. Il est déjà 10 heures.
infer – to read between the lines to form an opinion about something
inference – something that you think is true based on the information you have
inflection – the way your voice goes up and down when you are speaking to communicate meaning
inhibition – a feeling of shyness or embarrassment that stops you doing or saying what you really want
interpersonal communication skills – this is face-to-face language where the context helps speakers to make
interpret meaning; Jim Cummins coined the term Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS)
intonation – a pattern of rise and fall in the pitch of one’s voice which contributes to the meaning of sentences e.g.
questions are spoken with a rising intonation
irony – something which is the opposite of what is expected; using words to mean the opposite of what is expected
 e.g. « Quelle belle journée ! » when it is raining and grey.
key word searches – these can be carried out when the text is on the internet or in the computer’s memory. The
programme can be asked to search for specific words or phrases

 97
 manipulative – clever at controlling or deceiving people to get what you want. Manipulative language is aimed at
getting an influence or unfair advantage over others, e.g. in advertising or political speeches
 – a language (or terminology) used to talk about language e.g. ironie, hyperbole, allitération
metre – the arrangement of sounds in poetry into patterns of strong and weak beats. It creates rhythm
mode – there are different modes of communication: the written mode, the spoken or oral mode, the visual mode, the
kinetic mode which makes use of gestures; some texts combine these modes and are therefore called multimodal
texts – les textes multimodaux
La multimodalité se caractérise par la présence de différents modes iconiques, linguistiques et auditifs à l’intérieur
d’un même document. Le texte multimodal combine un ou plusieurs modes d’expression (ex. la bande-dessinée).
modulation – to change the sound of your voice
monitor – to watch and check a situation carefully in order to see how it changes over a period of time
motion – a proposal that is made formally at a meeting which is then usually decided on by voting, e.g. Le parlement
vote une motion de censure. The motion was defeated by 201 votes to 159.
e.g. La motion a été battue par 201 votes à 159.
multimodal – multimodal texts are designed to make use of more than one mode of communication e.g. sound, print,
images and gestures
onomatopoeia – words which sound like what they describe e.g. a brush swishes, a cow moos
e.g. zzzzz to Indicate someone is sleeping; Vroum to imitate the sound of an engine accelerating.
pace – the speed at which something happens or is done
perspective – a way of thinking about something, especially a way of thinking which is influenced by the type of
person you are or by your experiences
point of view – a particular way of thinking about or judging a situation, e.g. From an economic point of view, the new
development will benefit the town greatly. Also someone’s personal opinion or attitude about something, e.g. I respect
your point of view, but I’m not sure I agree with you.
e.g. Je respecte votre point de vue mais je ne suis pas certain d'être d'accord avec vous.
posture – the way you position your body when sitting or standing
pull down menus – a list of things a computer program can do. You make a pull-down menu appear on the computer
screen by clicking on a special word or icon.
pun – a play on words e.g. Seven days without water makes a person weak.
e.g. De deux choses lune, l’autre c’est le soleil. Jacques Prévert. Le paysage changeur 1945
rapport – friendly agreement and understanding between people, a cooperative relationship
reflect – to think carefully about something, or to say something that you have been thinking about
refrain – part of a song or poem that is repeated, especially at the end of each verse
register – the words, style and grammar used by speaker and writers in different contexts or situations e.g. official
documents are written in a bureaucratic register, legal documents are written in a legal register
resolution – when a problem or difficult situation in a story, play or novel is solved
rhetorical question – a question that is asked for emphasis or dramatic effect rather than to get an answer, e.g. Do
you know how lucky you are?
e.g. Tu penses vraiment que je n'y ai pas pensé ? Ne vous avais-je pas averti ?
rhythm – a regular and repeated pattern of sounds e.g. of strongly and weakly stressed syllables
rising action – in the early part of a play, novel, story or film one or more conflicts are developed. Because of the
increased sense of conflict the action is said to be ‘rising’ towards a climax.
sarcasm – speaking or writing using expressions which clearly mean the opposite of what is felt in order to be unkind
of offensive in an amusing way e.g. saying to someone who has arrived at a meeting very late, So good of you to
come.
e.g. « Allez, continue de parler, tu m’intéresses » (Carry on talking! – what you are saying is fascinating.) when we
mean than a person should stop talking.

scan – to run one’s eyes over a text in order to find specific information e.g. you scan a telephone directory for a
name and number, or a timetable for the time of a train or bus
skim – to read a text very quickly to get an overview e.g. skim the newspaper headlines for the main news
stage direction – a written instruction to an actor to do something in a play
stereotype – a fixed (and often biased) view about what a particular type of person (e.g. a woman, a foreigner, a
particular race group) is like
strategies – a planned series of actions for achieving something
symbol – something which stands for or represents something else e.g. a dove is a symbol of peace

 98
 synonym – a word which has the same meaning or nearly the same meaning as another word in the same language
e.g. big and large are synonyms in English
e.g. Envoyer and lancer
synthesise, synthesis – to draw together and combine information or ideas from a variety of sources; a synthesis is
a clear and succinct summary of these combined ideas
tempo (e.g. speech tempo) – the speed at which spoken words are delivered e.g. in a speech or performance of a
poem
testimony – a formal statement saying that something is true, OR a fact or situation that proves very clearly that
something exists or is true
text type – text types are broad categories of texts defined by their purpose, structure and language features e.g.
recount, procedure, information report, narrative, explanation, discussion
tone – tone is the emotional message of a text. In a written text it is achieved through words (e.g. neutral words to
create an objective tone). In a film it could be created through music or the setting.
turn-taking conventions – customs of behaviour and attitudes that people accept in order to cooperate and
communicate
understatement – a statement which is not strong enough to express the true or full facts or feelings e.g. To say I am
angry is the understatement of the year. e.g. "Le récent désagrément" to refer to a war in a recent past.
visualise (visualising) – to form a picture of someone or something in your mind
vivid – something that is particularly clear, bright, or seems very real
voice projection – to enable listeners to hear clearly what you are saying; to “throw” your voice into an audience
word attack skills – strategies for working out the meaning of unfamiliar words by recognising parts of them, e.g. that
rearrange suggests that the action is being repeated because of the prefix - re. e.g. Faire (to do) - Refaire (to do
again)
word family – A group of words that share a common root, to which different prefixes and suffixes are added e.g.
agree – agreeable, agreement, disagree, disagreement
e.g. jour, journée, abat-jour, journalier, ajourner.

 99
 Published by the Department of Basic Education

 222 Struben Street

 Private Bag X895, Pretoria, 0001

 Telephone: 012 357 3000 Fax: 012 323 0601

 ISBN: 978-1-4315-2690-1

 © Department of Basic Education
 website facebook twitter
www.education.gov.za www.facebook.com/BasicEd www.twitter.com/dbe_sa

 100