CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
 GRADES 4-6

 MANDARIN SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE
 Department of Basic Education
222 Struben Street
Private Bag X895
Pretoria 0001
South Africa
Tel: +27 12 357 3000
Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street Private Bag X9023
Cape Town 8000
South Africa
Tel: +27 21 465 1701
Fax: +27 21 461 8110
Website: http://www.education.gov.za

© 2014 Department of Basic Education

ISBN: 978-1-4315-2069-5

 1
 CONTENTS

SECTION 1 Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement 4

1.1 Background 4

1.2 Overview 4
1.3 General aims of the South African curriculum 5
1.4 Time allocation 7
 1.4.1 Foundation Phase 7
 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase 7
 1.4.3 Senior Phase 8
 1.4.4 Grades 10–12 8

SECTION 2 Introducing the Languages 10

2.1 Languages in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement 10
2.1.1 Language levels 10
2.1.2 The language skills 13
2.1.3 Language teaching approaches 16
2.2 Time allocation of Second Additional Language in the curriculum 17
2.3 Learning and Teaching Support Materials 18

SECTION 3 Content and Teaching Plans for Language Skills 20

3.1 OVERVIEW OF KILLS, CONTENT AND STRATEGIES 20

3.2 Expressions used in conversational Chinese – Reference list. 26
3.3 Spread of texts across Grades 4 -6 28
 3.3.1Summary of t0ext types across the phase. 30
 3.3.2 Length of Texts for Second Additional Language (to be produced by the learner) 33
 3.3.3 Length of Texts for Second Additional Language (for learners to engage with) 34
 3.3.4 Vocabulary to be attained by Second Additional Language learners. 34
3.4 Teaching plans 35
3.5 CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR MANDARIN CHINESE 35
 3.5.1 Grade 4 35
 3.5.2 Grade 5 54
 3.5.3 Grade 6 74

 2
 SECTION 4 Assessment in Second Additional Language 100

4.1 Introduction 100
4.2 Informal or daily assessment 100
4.3 Formal assessment 101
4.4 Programme of Assessment 104
 4.4.1 Overview of requirements 104
 4.4.2 Examinations 104
4.5 Recording and reporting 105
4.6 Moderation of assessment 106

4.7 General 106

 Glossary 106

 3
 SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND
ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
1.1 BACKGROUND
The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and
assessment in the schooling sector.
To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments
coming into effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy
document was developed for each subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme
Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines in Grades R-12.

1.2 OVERVIEW
(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement
 for learning and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion
 requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12 (January 2012).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) replaces the two current
 national curricula statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of
 31 May 2002, and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6
 October 2003 and No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii) comprise the
 following policy documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) during the period 2012-2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject
 Assessment Guidelines for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the
 General Education and Training Band, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in
 Government Gazette No. 29626 of 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the
 National Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette
 No.27819 of 20 July 2005;

 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior

 4
 Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF),
 regarding learners with special needs published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11
 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy document, National policy pertaining to the
 programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades
 R-12; and

 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior
 Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF),
 regarding the National Protocol for Assessment (Grades R-12), promulgated in
 Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.=

(d) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements
 of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, and the sections on the Curriculum and
 Assessment Policy as contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the
 norms and standards of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. It will therefore, in
 terms of section 6A of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis
 for the Minister of Basic Education to determine minimum outcomes and standards, as well as
 the processes and procedures for the assessment of learner achievement to be applicable to
 public and independent schools.

1.3 GENERAL AIMS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN CURRICULUM
(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and
 values worth learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children
 acquire and apply knowledge and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this
 regard, the curriculum promotes knowledge in local contexts, while being sensitive to global
 imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 serves the purposes of:

 • equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical
 ability or intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-
 fulfilment, and meaningful participation in society as citizens of a free country;

 • providing access to higher education;

 • facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and

 • providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is based on the following principles:

 • Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed,
 and that equal educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;

 • Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather
 than rote and uncritical learning of given truths;

 • High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be

 5
 achieved at each grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;

 • Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

 • Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and
 practices of social and environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution
 of the Republic of South Africa. The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is sensitive
 to issues of diversity such as poverty, inequality, race, gender, language, age, disability and
 other factors;

 • Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this
 country as important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

 • Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality,
 breadth and depth to those of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

 • identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;

 • work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

 • organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;

 • collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

 • communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;

 • use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the
 environment and the health of others; and

 • demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that
 problem solving contexts do not exist in isolation.

(e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each
 school. This can only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise
 and address barriers to learning, and how to plan for diversity.

 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the
 relevant support structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based
 Support Teams, Institutional-Level Support Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource
 Centres. To address barriers in the classroom, teachers should use various curriculum
 differentiation strategies such as those included in the Department of Basic Education’s
 Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

 6
 1.4 TIME ALLOCATION
1.4.1 Foundation Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 GRADE R GRADES 1-2 GRADE 3
 SUBJECT
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)

Home Language 10 8/7 8/7

First Additional Language 2/3 3/4

Mathematics 7 7 7

Life Skills 6 6 7

Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)
Creative Arts (2) (2) (2)
Physical Education
 (2) (2) (2)
Personal and Social Well-being
 (1) (1) (1)

TOTAL 23 23 25

(b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8
 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours
 and a maximum of 3 hours for Additional Language in Grades 1-2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8
 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours
 and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

(d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R - 2 and 2 hours as indicated
 by the hours in brackets for Grade 3.

1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS

Home Language 6

First Additional Language 5

 7
 Mathematics 6

Natural Sciences and Technology 3,5

Social Sciences 3

Life Skills 4

Creative Arts (1,5)
Physical Education (1)
Personal and Social Well-being
 (1,5)

TOTAL 27,5

1.4.3 Senior Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS

Home Language 5

First Additional Language 4

Mathematics 4,5

Natural Sciences 3

Social Sciences 3

Technology 2

Economic Management Sciences 2

Life Orientation 2

Creative Arts 2

TOTAL 27,5

1.4.4 Grades 10-12

(a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)

 8
 Home Language 4.5

First Additional Language 4.5

Mathematics 4.5

Life Orientation 2

 12 (3x4h)
A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group
BAnnexure B, Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National
policy pertaining to the programme and promotion
requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-
12, subject to the provisos stipulated in paragraph 28 of the
said policy document.

TOTAL 27,5

The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified
above, and may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should
a learner wish to offer additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these
subjects.

 9
 SECTION 2: INTRODUCING THE SECOND ADDITIONAL
LANGUAGE IN THE INTERMEDIATE PHASE
2.1 LANGUAGES IN THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
Language is a tool for thought and communication. It is also a cultural and aesthetic means commonly
shared among a people to make better sense of the world they live in. Learning to use language
effectively enables learners to acquire knowledge, to express their identity, feelings and ideas, to
interact with others, and to manage their world. It also provides learners with a rich, powerful and
deeply rooted set of images and ideas that can be used to make their world other than it is; better
than it is; clearer than it is. It is through language that cultural diversity and social relations are
expressed and constructed, and it is through language that such constructions can be altered,
broadened and refined.

2.1.1 Language levels

Language learning in the Intermediate Phase includes all the official languages in South Africa,
namely, Afrikaans, English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa, isiZulu, Sepedi (Sesotho sa Leboa), Sesotho,
Setswana, Siswati, Tshivenda, Xitsonga and non-official languages, namely, Arabic, French, German,
Gujarati, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Latin, Modern Greek, Portuguese, Spanish, Tamil, Telugu, Urdu. All
official languages can be offered at Home, First Additional, or Second Additional Language levels. All
non-official languages are offered on at least Second Additional Language level.

Language learning in Grades 4 - 9 includes all the official languages in South Africa. All these official
languages can be offered at Home, First Additional, or Second Additional Language levels. Non-
official languages may be offered on at least Second Additional Language level where such
languages have been developed.

The Home Language is the language first acquired by learners while First Additional language is the
language learnt in addition to one’s home language. The Second Additional Language is the further
language that a learner can learn, that enables broader communication and promotes multilingualism
as enshrined in the Constitution and the Language in Education Policy. The language may be in use
within the community or culture and will enhance nation building and intercultural understanding.
Many South African schools do not offer the home languages of some or all of the enrolled learners
but rather have one or two languages offered at home language level. As a result, the names Home
Language, First Additional and Second Additional Language refer to the proficiency levels at which
the language is offered, and not the native (Home) or acquired (as in the Additional)languages. For
the purposes of this policy, any reference to Home Language should be understood to refer to the
level and not the language itself.

The Home Language level provides for language proficiency that reflects the mastery of basic
interpersonal communication skills required in social situations and the cognitive academic skills
essential for learning across the curriculum. Emphasis is placed on the teaching of the listening,
speaking, Reading and Writing skills at this language level. This level also provides learners with a
literary, aesthetic and imaginative ability that will provide them with the ability to recreate, imagine,

 10
 and empower their understandings of the world they live in. However, the emphasis and marks
allocated for Reading and Writing from Grades 7 onwards are greater than that for speaking and
listening because the demands on learners’ literacy increase as they prepare for further and higher
education and the world of work.

The First Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge
of the language when they arrive at school. The focus in the first few years of school is on developing
learners’ ability to understand and speak the language - basic interpersonal communication skills. In
Grades 2 and 3 learners start to build literacy on this oral foundation. They also apply the literacy
skills they have already learned in their Home Language.

In the Intermediate and Senior Phases, learners continue to strengthen their listening, speaking,
Reading and Writing skills. At this stage the majority of children are learning through the medium of
their First Additional Language, English, and should be getting more exposure to it. Greater emphasis
is therefore given to using the First Additional Language for the purposes of thinking and reasoning.
This enables learners to develop their cognitive academic skills, which they need to study subjects
like Science in English. They also engage more with literary texts and begin to develop aesthetic and
imaginative ability in their Additional Language.

By the time learners enter Grade 7, they should be reasonably proficient in their First Additional
Language with regard to both interpersonal and cognitive academic skills. However, the reality is that
many learners still cannot communicate well in their Additional Language at this stage. The challenge
in Grades 4-6, therefore, is to provide support for these learners at the same time as providing a
curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards required in further grades. These standards
must be such that learners can use their additional language at a high level of proficiency to prepare
them for further or higher education or the world of work.

The Second Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any
knowledge of the language when they arrive at school. The focus upon exposure to Second
Additional Language is on developing learners’ ability to understand and speak the language - basic
interpersonal communication skills. In Grades 4 - 6 learners start to build their oral and literacy skills.
They also apply the oral and literacy skills they have already learned in their Home and First
Additional Languages.

In Grades 7-9, learners will continue to strengthen their Listening and Speaking while developing their
Reading and Writing skills.

By the time learners enter Grade 7, they should try to communicate in their Second Additional
Language at both interpersonal and social levels. However, the reality is that many learners still
cannot communicate well in their Additional Language at this stage. The challenge in Grades 4-6,
therefore, is to provide support for these learners at the same time as providing a curriculum that
enables learners to meet the standards required in further grades. These standards must be such that
learners can use their additional language at a level of proficiency to prepare them for further or
higher education or the world of work.

2.1.1.1 Specific aims of learning Second Additional Languages

Learning a Second Additional Language should enable learners to:

 11
 acquire the language skills necessary to communicate appropriately in the target language at a basic
 level;

listen, speak, read/view and write the language with growing confidence and enjoyment. These skills
 and attitudes form the basis for life-long learning;

express, orally and in writing, and emotions in order to become comfortable in the language;

use language and their imagination to find out more about themselves and the different cultures and
 the world around them. This will enable them to express their experiences and findings about
 the world orally and in writing;

use language to access and manage communication in other contexts. Information literacy is a vital
 skill in the ‘information age’ and forms the basis for lifelong learning;

use language as a means for expressing information on familiar topics; for interacting with a familiar
 range of texts; and for reading texts for enjoyment, basic information and communication.

2.1.1.2 Teaching the Second Additional Language

In order to learn an Additional Language well, one needs as much exposure to it as possible in order
to build linguistic competence and basic discourse competence. Teachers should therefore ensure
that learners listen to and read the Additional Language in the time allocated for various purposes.
The learners need opportunities to listen to the Additional Language for information and
comprehension (e.g. a dialogue) and for pleasure (e.g. a song). Even more importantly, they need
opportunities to read and view the Additional Language for information (e.g. instructions to make a
sandwich), pleasure (e.g. a simple story). Research shows that the best way to develop a wide
vocabulary is through reading of appropriate texts. It is very important that oral, written and visual
texts are at the right level for learners. If the texts are too difficult, learners will get discouraged and
they will not learn anything; if they are too easy, there will be no challenge and little learning will take
place. An important role of the language teacher is to match the level of text to the level of the learner.
Throughout the Intermediate Phase, learners should be listening to and reading texts that are in line
with their developing language skills.

Learners also need to use their Additional Language as often as possible. They need opportunities to
listen, speak, read and, to a lesser extent, write the Additional Language for interpersonal reasons
(e.g. a dialogue), to develop their creativity (e.g. performing a song, role playing, etc.), to develop
communicative skills (e.g. expressing an opinion, meeting and greeting).

Learners need to understand the purpose for which they are speaking. Throughout the Intermediate
Phase, learners should be doing oral exercises that are in line with their developing language skills. It
is necessary that learners get regular and timely feedback on their orals so that they know where and
how to improve. An important role of a language teacher is to provide high quality feedback, which is
at the heart of good assessment.

Learners also need to know the basics of language: grammar, vocabulary, spelling and punctuation.
Generally, teachers will deal with these aspects of language in context. For example, they can make
learners aware of the structure and features used in giving directions (commands are used). There is
also a place for direct/explicit teaching of the basics and the opportunity to practise them.

 12
 When planning a two-week unit of lessons, teachers should integrate language skills, together with
the basics of language. They should choose a text type and a topic / theme that will interest learners;
little learning can be achieved if learners are not engaged and motivated. For example, a topic for
phrases / sentences might be ‘My school’. Teachers could introduce the topic through listening and/or
reading, building the language and vocabulary knowledge necessary for speaking. For example,
learners could read a short text presenting the vocabulary and language structures. Once learners are
familiar with the language necessary for this topic, they could then write the phrase / sentence. This
would provide further opportunities for working with language. Teachers should provide feedback
throughout the process and administer an appropriate assessment activity at the end.

In Grades 4 - 6, it is important that:

There is a strong focus on Listening and Speaking

There is continued support for the development of vocabulary, sentence and paragraph construction,
 and grammar in context

Learners work with a variety of texts, including visual texts. These texts increase in difficulty as they
 move through the grades

2.1.2 THE LANGUAGE SKILLS
The Second Additional Language curriculum is packaged according to the following skills:

 1 Listening and Speaking

 2 Reading and Viewing

 3 Writing and Presenting

 4 Language Structures and Conventions

Listening and Speaking

Listening and Speaking are central to learning in all subjects. Through effective Listening and
Speaking strategies, learners collect and synthesise information, construct knowledge, solve
problems, and express ideas and opinions. In Grades 4 - 6, Second Additional Language learners
will use Listening and Speaking skills to communicate at a basic level.

In this phase, learners’ spoken language still needs to be scaffolded (i.e. modelled and supported, for
example, with vocabulary and sentence frames). The teacher needs to make sure that all learners get
opportunities to speak in the target language. Because learners will progress at a different pace, the
teacher needs to tailor speaking opportunities (e.g. the questions asked) to the level of the individual
child. As the children move through the grades, the teacher should expect children to speak more and
their utterances should become longer.

Teaching time should include daily practice of short Listening and Speaking activities as well as

 13
 longer focused activities spread out through the week.

In Grades 4- 6, teachers should approach listening as a three-phase activity:

Pre-listening: This prepares learners for listening to an oral text in their Additional Language. For
 example, the teacher could use a visual text and ask a general, focusing question in advance
 which the learners must answer after they have listened to the text for the first time.

During listening: It is good practice for the teacher to read (or play) a listening text several times,
 asking different questions each time. It is helpful to move from questions which enable learners
 to understand the general meaning of the text, to more specific questions that require a more
 detailed understanding of the text. By doing this, the teacher is helping learners to develop
 listening strategies.

Post listening: Learners answer further questions, review notes, use information (e.g. to label a
 picture).

Speaking happens informally in the classroom, for example, in group work. Learners also need
opportunities to practise the kind of informal conversations they might not normally have in the
classroom. Teachers should provide instruction in formal speaking and presenting, for example, a
prepared, reading aloud, etc. This will often be a two-step process:

Planning and organising ideas and information

Practising and presenting: demonstrating an awareness of audience and context; the use of
 appropriate and accurate Language Structures and Conventions; clear delivery; use of
 appropriate verbal and non-verbal techniques, etc.

Reading and Viewing

Reading and viewing skills are central to successful learning across the curriculum, as well as for full
participation in society, the world of work and the global context. Learners develop reading and
viewing skills of a familiar range of texts, including visual texts, for information.

If necessary, use shared reading at the beginning of Grade 4 to guide learners into this phase. This
method can be used from time to time if sufficient books at this level are available. This could be
alternated with storytelling. If books at this level are not available, then use texts from a textbook or
reader/s. Use also methods such as Reading with and Reading to the whole class.

Use guided group reading and independent/pair reading methods and gradually get learners to do
more and more independent reading. The independent reading stipulated in the teaching plans must
be accommodated within the time allocated for reading. Encourage learners to do independent
reading in any spare time that they have.

Set basic comprehension activities to ensure that learners understand what they read.

The reading process

The introduction of the reading process consists of the pre-reading, reading and post reading stages.
Activities that the Teacher will assist the learner in can be summarised as follows:

 14
 Pre-reading:

Activating prior knowledge and making connections.

Looking at the source, author, publication date and type of text.

Browsing through the first paragraph of a section - formulating expectancies.

Reading:

Pause occasionally to check comprehension and to let the ideas sink in

Use the context to work out the meaning of unknown words as much as is possible; where this is not
 possible, use a dictionary

Visualise what is being read

Continue reading even if parts are not always clearly understood.

Reread a section if it is not understood at all. Read confusing sections aloud, at a slower pace, or
 both.

Ask someone to help for understanding a difficult section

Add reading marks and annotate key points

Reflect on what is being read

Post reading:

When the need arises to recall specific information, outline key ideas and a few supporting details

Write key words to help clarifying and recalling main ideas.

Think about new questions on the topic

Understanding - confirm the understanding of the text

Extend thinking - use ideas that are seen in the text

Writing and presenting

Writing is a powerful instrument of communication that allows learners to construct and communicate
thoughts and ideas coherently. Frequent writing practice across a variety of familiar contexts, tasks
and subjects enables learners to communicate functionally and creatively. The aim is to introduce
writing skills to develop and present appropriate written texts. In the Intermediate Phase, Second
Additional Language learners will need careful support and guidance to develop writing skills.

Writing is important because it forces learners to think about grammar and spelling. This encourages
learners to process the language, speeds up language acquisition and increases accuracy. Learners
will learn to write a range of familiar creative and informational texts, initially using writing frames as
support and gradually learning to write particular text types independently. They will also employ the
writing process to produce well organised, grammatically correct writing texts.

Process approach to writing

Writing and designing texts is a process which consists of the following stages:

Pre-writing / planning

 15
 Drafting

Revision, editing, proofreading

Presenting

Learners need an opportunity to put this process into practice and they should:

decide on the purpose and audience of a text to be written and/or designed;

brainstorm ideas using, for example, mind maps, flow charts or lists;

consult relevant sources, select relevant information and organise ideas;

produce a first draft which takes into account purpose, audience, topic and text structure

read drafts and get feedback from others (classmates or the teacher);

edit and proofread the draft; and

produce a neat, legible, edited final version.

Language Structures and Conventions

A good knowledge of vocabulary and grammar provides the foundation for skills development
(listening, speaking, Reading and Writing) in the Second Additional Language. Intermediate Phase
learners will be introduced to language structure and conventions in the target language.

Through interacting with a variety of familiar texts, learners extend their use of vocabulary and
correctly apply language structures. In the Intermediate Phase, Second Additional Language
learners will take more notice of words and grammatical structures they are already familiar with.

Learners will explore progressively how language is used. They will also be able to use this
knowledge to experiment with language to build meaning (from word and sentence levels to whole
texts), and to see how a text and its context are related.

It is expected that Language Structures and Conventions will be taught in context as other language
skills are taught and developed. However, in the Intermediate Phase time should be set aside for
formal instruction and practice in Language Structures and Conventions. The teaching plans contain a
list of language items that should be covered in each grade. These are listed at the beginning of each
term. When selecting listening and reading texts for each two week cycle, make sure that they contain
some of the language items that need to be covered that term. Create activities related to these texts
that will enable learners to use these items, in context. Similarly, the writing texts learners will write
will include some of the language items. Give learners guidance on appropriate and correct usage of
these items. Select some of the items that learners have difficulty with and give them formal practice
(duringthe time per week set aside for this).

2.1.3 Language teaching approaches

The approaches to teaching language in these documents are text-based, communicative, integrated
and process oriented.

The text-based approach and the communicative approach are both dependent on the continuous
use and production of texts.

 16
 A text-based approach teaches learners to become competent, confident and critical readers,
writers, viewers, and designers of texts. It involves listening to, reading, viewing, and understanding
texts. Authentic texts are the main source of content and context for the communicative, integrated
learning and teaching of languages. The text-based approach also involves producing different kinds
of simple texts for particular purposes.

A communicative approach suggeststhat when learning a language a learner should have a great
deal of exposure to the target language and many opportunities to practise or produce the language.
Learners learn to read by doing a great deal of reading and learn to write by doing much writing.

The process approach is usedwhen learners produce oral and written texts. The learners engage in
different stages of the listening, speaking, reading, and writing processes. They must think of the
audience and the purpose during these processes. This will enable them to communicate and
express their thoughts in a natural way. For example,the teaching of writing does not focus on the
product only but also focuses on the purpose and process of writing. During process writing, learners
are taught how to generate ideas, to think about the purpose and audience, to write drafts, to edit their
work, and to present a written product that communicates their thoughts.

Approaches to teaching literature / working with texts

The main reason for reading literature / texts in the classroom is to create opportunities to apply
learned language skills. The teaching of literature / texts is never easy, but it is impossible without
personal, thoughtful, and honest interpretations and comments from the learners themselves. Unless
they learn how to understand texts on their own, they will not have learned much.

Ways to approach the teaching of literature would involve some or all of the following:

Make every attempt to read as much of the text in class as possible without breaking for any other
 activity. It is essential that learners have a clear idea of what is going on at the most basic level
 of the text. Read as many as possible in class, and ensure that learners read poems as well.

Writing activities that demand a basic understanding of the text being read can prove very helpful in
 raising language skills levels and raising appreciation of skills levels attained. Class discussions
 can be fruitful as long as everyone is involved and it leads to written work.

Finally, work with texts should be approached as a unit, a whole.

Following is a summary of the main text types encountered in the Intermediate Phase and the
language structures inherent in these text types. This information will assist in structuring activities on
the different texts so that learners can engage with these language structures. Select only a few
language structures to give attention to each time when teaching these text types.

2.2 TIME ALLOCATION
The recommended teaching time for Second Additional Language in the Intermediate Phase is
1.5 hours per week. All language content is provided within a two week cycle (3 hours). The
following time allocation for the different language skills is suggested.

 17
 Skills Time Allocation per
 Time allocation per
 Two Week Cycle %
 week (Hours)
 (Minutes)

Listening & Speaking 75 40

Reading & Viewing: Comprehension
 55 30
& Literature

Writing & Presenting 35 20
 1.5

Language Structures and
Conventions (this is also integrated 15 10
into the 4 skills)

Total 180 (3 hours) 100

2.3 LEARNING AND TEACHING SUPPORT MATERIALS
Each learner should have:

 An approved language textbook

 A reader/readers containing the following genre / text types:

 Stories

 Poetry

 Information texts

 Social texts

 A dictionary or word list

 Access to a range of reading material to accommodate different reading levels e.g. a selection
 of readers with sufficient copies of texts at each level in a class and school.

 Texts for shared reading in Grade 4. These may be books or other enlarged texts or the
 prescribed textbook or readers.

The teacher should have:

 A Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement

 Language in Education Policy (LiEP)

 The language textbook used by learners and other textbooks for resourcepurposes in addition
 to the approved text

 A reader/readers containing the recommended genre / text types

 18
 Dictionaries and reference books (monolingual, bilingual and multilingual dictionaries;
 thesaurus; encyclopaedia, a good grammar reference book, etc.)

A Teacher’s Resource File/Book: this may be a file made up of materials collected by the
 teacher or a commercially published Teacher’s Guide

Access to reading material in a class, school and/or public library in order to guide learners’
 reading

Audio/visual aids

 19
 SECTION 3: CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR
LANGUAGE SKILLS
3.1 OVERVIEW OF SKILLS, CONTENT AND STRATEGIES

The following is an overview of the content, skills and strategies to be found in the teaching plans.

Overview of content, skills and strategies table

Skills Grades 4-6

 Content Strategies and sub-skills

 Listening comprehension
Listening and Listening process
 Listening for information Pre-listening
Speaking
 Pronunciation During listening
 Listening for enjoyment Listening comprehension
 Different forms of oral Recording main ideas by retelling,
 communication:
 explaining
 Conversation
 Listen to and respond to simple questions
 Directions / instructions /
 Post- listening
 procedures
 Story telling The speaking process
 Role-play Planning, researching and organising
 Group discussion Practising and presenting
 Short poems and rhymes Communication for social purposes
 Language games Simple conversations
 Personal / factual recounts Turn taking conventions

 Refer to Expressions used in Encouraging use of the additional language
 Ask and respond to questions.
 conversational Mandarin –
 see Reference list Recount events
 Informal presentation of familiar event
 Correct format, vocabulary, language and conventions

Reading and Recommended text types: Reading and viewing process:
viewing Stories e.g. contemporary
 Use pre-reading, reading and post reading process and
 realistic fiction, traditional
 stories (myths and legends, strategies:
 folk tales, fables), adventure To understand the text
 stories, picture stories with For close reading of the text (reading comprehension)
 captions To demonstrate independent reading progressively (reading
 Poetry /Song for pleasure, information and learning)
 Introductory Information texts
 Introduce learners to :
 e.g. procedures, factual
 Text features - titles, illustrations, headings, subheadings,
 recounts,

 20
 Social texts e.g. invitations, numbering, captions, headlines, format.
 greeting cards, letters Text structures - lists, sequential order, description,
 Media texts e.g. procedures, main point and narrative sequence.
 advertisements, notices, Parts of a book - title page, table of contents, chapters,
 pamphlets glossary, etc.
 Visual texts: advertising Reading and viewing strategies
 (posters, pamphlets,
 Rereading
 advertisements),
 Clarifying
 cartoon, comic strip, diagram /
 graph / table / charts / Drawing conclusions / own opinion
 photographs / drawings Visual Literacy - (a familiar range of graphic and visual texts
 Comprehension paragraphs e.g. advertisements, notices, posters, comics, cartoons,
 photographs, pictures):
 Text for prepared reading
 aloud Reading of literary texts

 Texts for information Poetry/Song
 Literal meaning
 Message
 Sound devices e.g. rhyme, rhythm, punctuation, repetition

 Story
 Storyline
 Characters
 Setting

 Information and social texts
 Audience and purpose

 Prepared and unprepared reading (Reading aloud )
 Use of tone, voice projection, pace, eye contact, posture and
 gestures
 Pronounce words correctly

 Basic characters writing with
Writing and Process writing:
 correct strokes and stroke
presenting order. Pre-writing/planning
 Word writing e.g. lists Brainstorming of vocabulary and ideas in a group
 Sentence writing Organise ideas
 Paragraph writing Drafting
 Text types Word choice
 Structuring sentences
 Creative writing
 General ideas
 Descriptive e.g. descriptions of
 people, places, animals, Reads own writing
 plants, objects, etc Gets feedback from teacher
 Narrative e.g. stories, personal
 Revising, editing, proofreading and presenting
 recounts
 Revises: improves content and structure of ideas
 Picture stories
 Refines word choice, sentence and paragraph structure
 Simple Dialogues
 Presents neat, legible final version
 Transactional writing (social,
 functional, and information

 21
 texts)
 Messages, greeting cards,
 invitations
 Posters, notices,
 advertisements
 Completing a simple form.

Language Working with words (Vocabulary development): use of dictionary, meaning, syllables,
Structures and phonics, synonyms, antonyms, homonyms
Conventions Working with sentences

 Parts of speech, e.g. nouns, determiners, pronouns, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions,
 connectors

 Sentence structure: simple, and complex sentences, command form, questions, statements

 Word order

 Negative forms

 Language conventions

 Introduce simple language rules

 Characters

 Sounds

 Punctuation

 Refer to Language Structures and Conventions - Reference list

Language Structures and Conventions - Reference list

The following language structures will be taught in the context of Reading and Writing, and also as part of a
systematic grammar programme. These structures need to be introduced progressively throughout the grades.

NB: The unique features of the language must be taken into consideration. As a result, only features applicable to
a specific language should be given attention in the text below.

Nouns/ Common (e.g.学生) and proper nouns (e.g. 中国)

名词 Abstract nouns e.g 精神

 Direction nouns e.g. 上(边／面)、下（边／面）、左（边／面）、右（边／面）、前（边／面
 ）、后（边／面）

Measure Measure words for nouns e.g. 个、张、件

Words /量词 Measure words for verbs e.g. 次、回

 Position of measure words: Numerals + Measure words + Nouns e.g. 一个人、一件衣服

 Verbs + Numerals + Measure words e.g. 读两遍、看一眼

Pronouns/ Personal pronouns: 我、你、他、我们、你们、他们 别人

 22
 代词 Reflexive pronouns: 自己

 Interrogative pronouns: 谁、什么、哪儿、哪里、怎么样

 demonstrative pronouns: 这、那

Adjectives / Position of adjectives：

形容词 Adj.+ Nouns e.g. 漂亮的女孩

 V. + 得＋ Adv. + Adj. e.g. 走得很快

Adverbs/ Adverbs of negation e.g.不、没有

副词 Adverbs of manner e.g.忽然、悄悄

 Adverbs of time e.g. 已经、刚、刚才、马上、立刻

 Adverbs of frequency e.g. 一直、常常、经常、从

 Adverbs of degree e.g.非常、很、十分、太

 Adverbs of scope e.g. 都、也

 Position of Adverbs: Adv. + V. e.g. 经常去中国、都学习外语 ;

 Adv. + adj. e.g. 很大、非常好吃

Prepositions/ Place and direction e.g .在、从…到、向

介词 Time e.g. 从…到

 Concerning e.g.对

 With e.g. 跟

 Positions of Prepositions: Prepositions + Nouns e.g. 在学校、从两点到五点

Extential Subjects + 在 + Nouns + direction nouns e.g. 图书馆在办公楼的西边。

sentences Nouns + direction nouns + 有 + nouns e.g. 桌子上有两本书。

/存现句 Nouns + direction nouns + 是 + nouns e.g. 办公楼西边是图书馆。

 Nouns + direction nouns + V. + 着 ＋ Noun(phrases) e.g. 桌子上放着一盆花。

Aspect 了

Particles/ Subject + Verb + 了 + Objects e.g. 他买了五本书。

动态助词 了 at the end of a sentence e.g. 我们已经出发了。我昨天去南京路了。 他吃了四碗饭了。

 过

 Subjects + Verb + 过（＋objects) e.g. 他去过北京。

 着

 Subjects + 着 + objects e.g. 他穿着白色衣服。

 23
 Progressive Subjects + (正) 在 + V + (Objects) +（呢） e.g. 张老师（正）在上课呢。

aspect /

进行态

Structural 的

particles/ Nouns/pronouns + 的 + Nouns e.g. 妈妈的衣服、她的书

结构助词 Adjective + 的 + Nouns e.g. 可爱的小孩

 地

 Adj. + 地 + Verbs e.g. 快乐地生活

 得

 Verbs + 得 + (adv.) + Adj. e.g. 走得很快

Modal Verbs/ To express ability：会、能 e.g. 我会说汉语。她能做很多中国菜。

能愿动词 To express permission：可以 e.g. 这里可以吸烟吗？

 To express willingness ：愿意 e.g. 我愿意帮助她。

 To express “should” ：应该 e.g. 你应该去上课。

Sentence statements

structures/ Subjects + verbs + Objects e.g. 我爱妈妈。

基本句型 Subjects + Adverbs + adjectives e.g. 她很聪明。

 Subjects + Nouns e.g. 我儿子两岁。

 Questions

 general questions: statements + 吗? e.g. 你去上课吗？

 WH questions: e.g. 你叫什么名字？他是谁？ 你要去哪儿？

 Affirmative-negative questions : subjects + Adj. 不 Adj.? e.g. 那件衣服贵不贵？

 subjects + V. 不 V. (+objects)? e.g. 你来不来？

 subjects + V. 没 V. (+objects)? e.g. 你吃没吃早饭？

 Alternative questions : …还是… e.g. 你喝茶还是喝咖啡？

 你去还是我去？

 Imperatives

 V.(+Objects) e.g. 接电话！

 别＋V. (+Objects) e.g. 别吃这个。

Adverbials/ Positions of Adverbials: before verbs

 24
 状语 To express time:

 subjects + time + V.; Time + Subjects + V. e.g. 我六点吃早饭。

 明天我去你家。
 To express place:

 Subjects + place + V. e.g. 我在图书馆看书。

 To express manner:

 Subjects （+Adv.）+ Adj.+ 地+ V. e.g. 他很认真地听老师说话。

Complements/ To express results:

补语 V.+ adj. e.g 房间打扫干净了。

 V.+ 完 e.g. 本子用完了。

 V.+ 到 e.g. 汉语书买到了。

 V.+ 好 e.g. 晚饭做好了。

 To express duration:

 V.+ durations + Objects e.g. 看三小时电视

 V.+ Objects + V. + durations e.g. 看电视看三小时

 To express degree:

 V.+ 得 +Adv.+Adj e.g. 说得很快

 V.+ objects + V. + 得(+ Adv.) + adj. e.g. 说汉语说得很快

 To express directions:

 V. + 来／去 e.g. 上来 、上去、下来、下去、进来、出去

 V. + 上／下＋来／去 e.g. 拿上来、搬下去

 V. + 进／出＋来／去 e.g. 跑进来、走出去

Comparative A + 比+ B + Adj. e.g. 小王比小张高。

structures / A + 没有 + B + Adj. e.g. 小张没有小王高。

比较句

“Ba”structure/ Subjects + 把 + Objects + V. + Adj e.g. 你把衣服洗干净。

把字句 Subjects + 把 + Objects + V. + Prepositions + place e.g. 他把水果放在桌子上。

 把椅子搬到小房间里。
 Sb.1 + 把 + objects + （V）给 + Sb.2. e.g. 他把作业交给了老师。

 把书给我。

Vocabulary Synonyms, antonyms

development Figures of speech (simile, metaphor, personification)
and figurative Idiomatic expressions/idioms/proverbs

 25
 language/ Borrowed words

词汇和修辞

Punctuation/ colon, semi-colon, apostrophe, quotation marks, parentheses, ellipses, exclamation marks,
 question marks, comma
标点符号

Connectors/ Logical connectors to link sentences in a paragraph:

连词、复句 To connect words/phrases: 和、又……又…… e.g. 中国和南非 、又聪明又努力

 To connect clauses/sentences:

 addition: 也、又……又……、不但……而且…… e.g. 我喜欢游泳，也喜欢打乒乓。

 她又想学法律又想学音乐。

 他不但会说汉语，而且中国歌也唱得很好。

 sequence in time: 先……然后…… e.g. 我先去食堂吃饭，然后去看球赛。

 ordering ideas： 首先／第一……，其次……／第二……，最后……

 cause/effect： 因为……所以……。 e.g. 因为很忙，所以我没有去。

 but:（虽然）……，但是……。 e.g. 虽然来中国只有一个月，但是他已经有了很多中国朋

 友。

 conditioning: 如果……就……。 e.g. 如果你觉得累，就在家休息。

3.2 Expressions used in conversational Chinese - Reference list

GREETINGS /打招呼 INTRODUCING ONESELF AND OTHERS/ 介绍
·你好！ ·我叫……
·……好! ·我是……
·……，您好吗？ ·这(位)是……
·最近怎么样？

EXPRESSING THANKS / 表示感谢 SAYING GOODBYE / 告别
·谢谢! ·再见!(再见!)
·非常感谢！ ·明天见!
 Long trips, vacations, short outings
 ·祝你一路顺风!
 ·祝你们一路平安!

 26
 ACCEPTING / 接受 ASKING / REQUESTING 请求
Accepting a request ·请+verb
·好。 ·……吗?
·没问题。 ·……好吗?
·可以。 ·……可以吗?
·好吧! ·可以……吗？
Accepting an invitation ·……行吗?
·行，我一定去。
·谢谢你的邀请，我一定参加。

EXPRESSING AGREEMENT/DISAGREEMENT / 表示 EXPRESSING POSSIBILITY / 表达可能性
（不）同意 ·这件事我能办到。
Expressing agreement / 表示同意、赞成 ·verb+得+Complement, e.g. 吃得完；办得到
·你的意见很好，我非常赞成。 ·这不可能。
·太好了，我完全赞成! ·Verb+不+Complement, e.g. 吃不完；办不到
Expressing disagreement / 表示不同意、不赞成
·我不同意。
·不好。(informal)

APOLOGISING / 道歉 REQUESTING A REPEAT / 要求对方重复
·对不起。(没什么。) ·再说一遍好吗?
·请原谅。(算了，别往心里去了。) ·对不起，我没听懂，你能不能再说一遍?
·原谅我吧。(这不全是你的错。) ·对不起，请你再说一遍!
·都是我的错，请您多包涵!(看你说到哪儿去了。) ·老师，您再讲一遍好吗?

EXPRESSING DISSATISFACTION / 表达不满 STARTING A TOPIC / 打开话题
·太+ Adj. +了,e.g. 这件大衣太贵了。 ·最近身体怎么样?
·太+不+Adj. +了, e.g. 太不客气了。 ·最近忙什么呢?
·using rhetorical questions, e.g. 你懂什么？ ·今天真冷!(好/暖和/凉快/热)
·有（一）点儿+Adj., e.g. 这件衣服有点儿小。 ·昨天晚上看球了吧……
·Adj. +了+点儿, e.g. 这道题难了点儿。 ·好久不见了，怎么样?

GIVING ADVICE / 建议 PROHIBITING STATEMENTS（often seen on a
·我看…… sign）/ 禁止（常见于标牌）
·我想…… ·禁止抽烟
·我建议…… ·禁止乱倒垃圾
·是不是… ·此处禁止停车
·能不能…… ·闲人免进
·你最好……
·……，好不好？

 27
 ·……，怎么样？

CONFIRMING BEING UNDERSTOOD / 确认对方是否 INTERRUPTING / 打断他人的话
 听懂 ·对不起，我打断一下。
·你听明白了吗? ·啊，我忽然想起来了，我再说一句。
·我说的你记下来了吗? ·啊，我插一句话。
·要不要我再说一遍? ·对不起，我先说个事儿。
·我的话不知道说清楚了没有?
·您听清楚了吗?

CHANGING A TOPIC / 转换或转移话题 ENDING A CONVERSATION / 结束交谈
·谈到这里，我倒想起了一件事。 ·今天(这次)就谈到这儿吧。
·对了，说起… ·这个问题我们改日再谈吧。
·哎，哎，扯远了。 ·对不起，我该走了。
·还是回到刚才谈的话题上吧。 ·好了，就说到这儿吧。
·刚才我忘了，…… ·我说完了，谢谢。
·顺便问一句，…… ·今天我们谈得很愉快。
·对了，差点儿忘了，…… ·好了，该……了。
·这事以后再说吧。

WITHDRAWING FROM A CONVERSATION. / 退出交
 谈
·你们谈，我还有点儿事，先走一步。
·你们谈着，我出去一下。
·对不起，我该走了

3.3 SPREAD OF TEXTS ACROSS GRADES 4-6

A variety of texts have been selected for each two week period. The key texts are captured below.
Learners will engage with some or all of the texts in a two week period, that is, they will listen to or
present orally or read or write.

 28
 Spread of texts table

 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

Weeks Term 1

1-2 Story Story Story; language game

3-4 Information text e.g. narrative Information text with visuals Information text: descriptive account;
 recount, map, e.g. maps/pictures/ media text e.g. advert
 conversation; narrative
 recount

5-6 Story and descriptions of Story, role-play, description Story
 people or characters of people; invitation;
 message

7-8 Information text : Information text: instructions; Information text with visuals e.g.
 instructions, lists language game maps/pictures instructions; definitions

9 - 10 Song, poem Poem; song Poem; Song description of a person;
 description of an
 object/animal/plant/place; language
 game

Weeks Term 2

1-2 Story Story Story and message, conversation

3-4 Information text with visuals Information text with visuals Information text e.g. description of
 e.g. pictures; poster; e.g. maps/pictures; object/animal/ plant/place; visual text
 directions, description of an descriptions of object/s/ e.g. pictures /maps /photographs
 object plants/animals/places

5-6 Personal recount Personal recount Story, personal recount; role play

7- 8 Procedures, instructions Information text: instructions; Reads information text with visuals
 information text with visuals factual account e.g. timetables and television
 e.g. pictures/ schedules/ maps/ pictures;
 maps/photographs definitions; language game

 29
 9 - 10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

Weeks Term 3

1- 2 Story, description of Story; oral description of Story; oral descriptions of
 person/animal/character, places/people; personal places/animals/ plants / objects
 dialogue recount

3-4 Information text e.g. factual Information text with visuals Information text with visuals e.g.
 recount audio-visual text e.g. e.g. maps/pictures /maps/pictures/ talk;
 poster/ notices; conversation

5-6 Story; poem Story; poem Story; poem

7- 8 Information text with visuals Information text -; Information texts -language game;
 e.g. pictures; descriptions of conversation; language mind map
 places/plants/animals/objects game; descriptions of descriptions of
 procedures places/plants/animals/objects places/plants/animals/objects
 procedures procedures

9 - 10 role-play; dialogue; conversation; dialogue conversation; dialogue

Weeks Term 4

1- 2 Conversation, language Story, language game; Story; conversation; dialogue
 game; story personal recount

3-4 Information text with visuals Information text: factual text; information text talk; language game;
 e.g. pictures; visual text e.g. poster definitions;
 posters/notices; messages

5-6 Story, language game Story, poem, personal Story, poem
 recount

7-8 Conversation; talk; Information text, Information text and visual text
 Information text; visual text conversation; poster; visual poster; advertisement
 e.g. poster/notice text e.g. chart

9 - 10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 30
 3.3.1 Summary of text types across the phase

The tables below describe the range of text types that learners should be taught to write in Grades 4-
6; other texts could also be included where appropriate. Some of these texts are not included in the
teaching plan tables. This does not mean that they should not form part of teaching and learning as
they are equally important.

Text type Language structures found in each text type

Personal recounts/ Descriptive language, e.g. adjectives, adverbs

个人信息 Time words to connect events, e.g. adverbs of time

 Words which tell us where, when, with whom, how

 Simple Sentences

 Connectors, e.g. 然后，另外，最后, etc.

 Direct and Indirect Speech

 Nouns and pronouns

Factual recounts/ For factual recounts use the following parts of speech:

事实描述 • Adverbs and Adverbial phrases

 • Nouns and pronouns

 • Prepositions

 • Verbs

Story and plays / Action words, e.g. verbs

故事与游戏 Adverbs to describe actions

 Adjectives to describe characters and setting

 Simple and complex sentences

 Connectors (especially time words) for showing sequence of events, e.g. 先，然后，另
 外，最后, etc

 Direct and Indirect Speech

 Punctuation, e.g. colon, exclamation marks, question marks

Poems/诗歌 Figurative language, e.g. personification, simile, metaphor, etc.

 Nouns

 Adjectives

 Pronouns

 Adverbs

 Prepositions

 Simple sentences

 31
 Text type Language structures found in each text type

Procedures/ Verbs often at the beginning of each instruction
Instructions/ Command form of the verb
Directions/
 Adverbs
步骤/说明/指南
 Words which tell us how, when, where, with whom

 Connectors to show the sequence in steps, e.g. 首先，其次，另外，然后，最后, etc

 Prepositions

Conversations/会 Verbs
话 Prepositions

 Pronouns

 Sentence structures, e.g. questions

Information texts/ Nouns

信息文本 Verbs

 Adjectives

 Prepositions

 Pronouns

 Vocabulary development, e.g. vocabulary for comparing, contrasting relationships

 Punctuation, e.g. comma

Definitions/界定 Nouns

 Adjectives

Descriptions/ Nouns

描述 Adjectives used to give details

 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 INFORMATION

Narrative and descriptive recounts Factual /narrative/descriptive Explanations such as reference
 e.g. news, stories, description of recounts e.g. news stories, books, dictionaries, definitions,
 something - based on fact description of something - based texts from other subjects

 32
 General knowledge texts on fact Factual recounts such as news
Media texts such as radio General knowledge texts reports (headline, explain the
 announcements headline, body, comment), eye-
 Information texts
 witness accounts
Instructions such as instructions for Media texts e.g. radio
 experiments, rules of games, Information texts:
 announcements
 directions Media texts: advertisements,
 Instructions such as instructions for
Visual texts: maps, photographs, posters, magazine articles
 experiments, rules of games,
 pictures directions Instructions such as instructions for
 experiments, rules of games,
 Visual texts: photographs, pictures
 directions
 Visual texts: maps, photographs,
 pictures

 LITERARY

Narratives: contemporary realistic Narratives e.g. contemporary Narratives such contemporary
 fiction, myths and legends, realistic fiction, myths and realistic fiction, myths and
 fables, fantasy, adventure, funny, legends, fables, fantasy, legends, fables, fantasy,
 real life stories. adventure, funny, real life stories, adventure, funny, real life stories,
Personal recounts such as oral historical fiction historical fiction, science fiction,
 anecdotes (events in order), diary Personal recounts such as oral narrative poems
 entries anecdotes (sets the scene, Personal recounts such as. oral
Poem, play, role play events in order), diary entries anecdotes (sets the scene,
 Poem, play, role play events in order, personal
 comment), diary entries,
 autobiographies
 Poem, play, role play

 SOCIAL/FUNCTIONAL

Conversations e.g. making Conversations: making requests, Conversations: making requests,
 enquiries, giving information explaining, giving information explaining, giving information
 about family about community about community
Short social texts: greeting cards, Short social texts: notices, Short social/functional texts:
 notes, messages messages notices, messages

3.3.2 Length of Texts for Second Additional Language (to be produced by learners)

 Text Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

Paragraph 10 - 20 words/20-30 20 - 30 words/30-50 30 - 40 words/40-60
Words
 characters characters characters
Sentences

 3 - 4 sentences 4 - 6 sentences 6 - 8 sentences

 33
 Oral creative texts e.g.
recounts, retelling or 3 min 3 min 3-4 min
telling stories

Written creative and
 20 words/20-30 30 words/ 30-50 40 words/40-60
information texts（in
 characters characters characters
pinyin） e.g. recounts,
 1 paragraph 1 paragraph 2 paragraphs
stories, reports

Shorter texts (in pinyin),
e.g. 10 - 20 words/20-30 20 - 30 words/30-50 30 - 40 words/40-60
·Messages, notes characters characters characters
·descriptions

3.3.3 Length of Texts for Second Additional Language (for learners to engage with)

Task Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

Longer listening
comprehension texts e.g. 150-200 characters / up 200-300 characters / up 300-400 characters / up
story, interviews, plays, to 5 mins to 5 mins to 5 mins
news reports

Shorter listening
comprehension texts e.g.
 60-80 characters / 1-2 80-100 characters / 1-2 100-120 characters / 1-2
announcements,
 mins mins mins
information texts,
instructions, directions

Reading
comprehension/intensive 100-150 characters 150-200 characters 200-250 characters
reading texts (in pinyin)

3.3.4 Vocabulary to be achieved by Second Additional Language learners

 Term 1 2 3 4

Vocabulary Grade 4 20 - 30 30 - 40 40 - 50 50 - 60

 34
 Common Grade 5 60 - 70 70 - 80 80 - 90 90 - 100
 spoken words

 Grade 6 100 - 110 110 - 120 120 - 130 130 - 150

Reading
characters Grade 4 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50

 Grade 5 50-60 60-70 70-80 80-90

 Grade 6 90-100 100-110 110-120 120-130

 Reading texts? Grade 4 30 - 50 30 - 50 30 - 50 30 - 50
 vocabulary (in
 pinyin) Grade 5 50 - 80 50 - 80 50 - 80 50 - 80

 Grade 6 80 - 100 80 - 100 80 - 100 80 - 100

 3.4 TEACHING PLANS
 The teaching plan indicates the minimum content to be covered per term. The sequence of the
 content listed in a two week cycle is not prescribed and the time given is an approximate
 indication of how long it should take to cover the content. Teachers should design their
 teaching plans / work schedules using their textbooks to teach the content per two week cycle
 using appropriate sequence and pace. The content given in a two week cycle are key
 texts/activities with the main skills and strategies learners need to develop.

 3.4.1 How texts link together in the two week cycle

 Different texts have been used as a basis for designing the two week teaching cycle. They have been
 selected on the basis of how they link together to form an integrated unit, for example learners will
 listen to a story and then read a story. They will be asked to write a short oral description of a place or
 person (that will link to the story) or they might be asked to write a message about the story. Select a
 theme for each two week cycle that will enable the teacher to link the activities successfully. The
 reason for using themes is to make it possible to constantly recycle vocabulary and language
 structures in meaningful contexts. In practice, integration suggests variety: variety of forms, of
 activities, of texts and themes (see Suggested Themes - Reference List below)

 3.4.2 How the texts/activities are sequenced across the two week cycle

 The texts do not have to be taught in a particular order. In most cases, there should be a Listening
 and Speaking activity/text to prepare for the reading or writing activity. Sometimes, the Listening and
 Speaking activity should derive from the reading text. Learners should engage with the different kinds
 of texts orally and in reading before they are asked to write these texts. In most cases, the text to be
 listened to e.g. a story will be different to and at a higher level than the one that learners will read.

 35
 This is because their listening skills are more developed than their reading skills.

3.4.3 The type of texts prescribed and recommended

There are prescribed text types that are to be taught in every two week cycle. These are specified in
the teaching plan and should be contained in the prescribed textbook. In most cases, no specific story
type is prescribed. Choices may be made from the variety of contemporary stories, imaginative stories
(e.g. adventure, and traditional stories (e.g. myths, legends and fables) that are available. The same
is true of poems and songs.

In all cases, this additional reading should relate to the topics and themes chosen for the prescribed
texts in that two week cycle. This is very important as it consolidates the Second Additional Language
learner’s knowledge and understanding of the vocabulary and concepts related to the topic.

3.4.4 Number of key texts in a two week cycle

In the early part of the year, there is usually only one text type or activity per two week cycle. There
will sometimes be two text types or activities per two week cycle. Teach these text types and the
related activities bearing in mind that learners will be exposed to them numerous times during the
course of the year.

3.4.5 How the Language Structures and Conventions are addressed

The content of the “Language Structures and Conventions” section is derived from the types of texts
prescribed under the headings Listening and Speaking, Reading, and Writing and will naturally be
given attention in the process of engaging with the texts and during the time allocated for Listening
and Speaking, Reading and Writing. For example, if a story is being done, learners will naturally use
the particle了 or 过 and will read texts using 了 or 过. However, it is also important that activities be
developed that focus on particular language structures, in context. Choose items from the “Language
Structure and Conventions” section to give learners additional practice in these aspects. Construct
activities that are meaningful to learners and that relate to the texts they are studying in the two week
cycle. More activities of this nature should be done as learners make progress from Grade 4 to 6.
Select very carefully which rules to be explained to learners and keep these to a minimum. Second
Additional Language learners learn a language through constant exposure to it and through using to
it. Practice in Language Structures and Conventions will refine these skills. Teaching should integrate
all the language skills and language structures as they are interrelated. All of these should be taught
in context.

 Suggested Themes - Reference List

Animals House
Body Likes and dislikes
Clothes Music
Colours Nature/environment
Days and Months Places
Emotions School
Family Sport

 36
 Food Time
Greetings Transport
Hobbies Weather and seasons

 37
 3.5 CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR MANDARIN CHINESE: SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE
3.5.1 GRADE 4 MANDARIN SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE

 GRADE 4

 TERM 1

Week Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listening and Speaking basic Reading Introduce script Working with pinyin
 conversation in target language (e.g. ·Builds basic phonic knowledge of
 Reads words based on written Writes basic words in pinyin.
 simple finals and four tones
 greetings) conversation ·Writes words about the story
 ·Answers simple questions ·Answers basic questions about the text ·Writes 1-2 characters. Working with characters
 ·Names characters in the story ·Expresses feelings about the text ·Writes 1-2 characters about the story.
 ·Code switches if necessary ·Discusses new vocabulary from the Vocabulary in context
 read text
 Practises Listening and Speaking
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics ·Spells five words from read text in
 pinyin

3-4 Listening and Speaking Reading Writing Working with pinyin
 ·Builds basic phonic knowledge of
 conversation in target language (e.g. Reads words based on conversation in Introduce script
 initials and four tones
 communication in the classroom) pinyin. Writes basic words in pinyin.
 ·Answers questions ·Uses appropriate vocabulary Working with characters
 ·Discusses new vocabulary ·Writes 1-2 characters in context
 ·Writes 1-2 characters
 ·Code switches if necessary Vocabulary in context

5-6 Listens to a story Reading Introduce script Working with pinyin

 38
 GRADE 4

 TERM 1

Week Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Builds basic phonic knowledge of
 Choose from contemporary realistic Reads an extract from the textbook or Writes about a story in pinyin
 finals and four tones
 fiction/traditional stories/personal reader/s or Teacher’s Resource File ·Writes words or phrases about the
 ·Mixing and matching words about the story. Working with characters
 accounts/adventure/real life stories
 story with support ·Writes own words to expresses ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 ·Expresses feelings about the story feelings about the story.
 Resource File Working with sentences
 ·Answers questions about the text Records words and their meanings in
 ·Answers simple questions ·Understands and uses sentences with
 ·Names characters in the story correctly Practises reading pinyin in a personal dictionary “是” ,e.g.我是南非人。
 ·Reads aloud introduce the idea of ·Uses drawings or words using the
 ·Uses words to express feelings about ·Uses simple questions with “吗” , e.g.
 appropriate pronunciation and words or explanations to show the
 the story
 meaning, etc. 你是老师吗？?
 expression
 ·Code switches if necessary
 Vocabulary in context

7-8 Listens to and carries out basic Reads basic procedural Introduce script Working with pinyin
 instructions e.g. recipe/instructions for (instructions)texts e.g. ·Builds basic phonic knowledge of
 Writes simple instructions in pinyin
 finals and four tones
 making or doing something recipe/instructions for making or doing using a frame
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s something ·Number the instructions Working with Mandarin characters

 Resource File (TRF) Text from the textbook or Teacher’s ·Uses the right sequence (rearrange in ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Answers questions Resource File (TRF) correct order)
 Working with sentences
 ·Listens and responds appropriately ·Pre-reading and discussion: predicts ·Writes the instructions/words using a
 ·Understands and uses negative forms
 from title and pictures frame.
 Gives simple instructions with “不”,e.g. 她不是老师。
 ·Answers questions about the text ·Writes 1-2 characters
 ·Uses correct specific details ·Uses questions with 什么、哪, e.g. 你
 ·Discusses sequence of instructions Records words and their meanings in
 ·Uses correct sequence 叫什么名字？你是哪国人？
 ·Follows the instructions pinyin a personal dictionary.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Vocabulary in context
 ·Uses drawings or words to show the

 39
 GRADE 4

 TERM 1

Week Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 meaning, etc.
 enrichment Practises reading
 ·Reads aloud introduce the idea of
 (choose one for daily practice)
 appropriate pronunciation and
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or
 expression
 song
 ·Responds physically to instructions
 ·Plays a language game
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics

9-10 Listens to a song/simple poem Reads a simple poem/s Introduce script Working with pinyin
 ·Reviews finals, initials and four tones.
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Writes 2-3 sentences in pinyin about
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) the selected poem in a frame Working with characters
 ·Discusses central idea ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and ·Writes simple phrases.
 ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Relates to own experience pictures
 Records words and their meanings in Working with sentences
 ·Code switches if necessary ·Uses reading strategies e.g. prediction,
 looks at pictures carefully, uses
 pinyin in a personal dictionary ·Understands and uses demonstrative
 ·Identifies words which begin with the ·Uses drawings or sentences/phrases pronouns “这” and “那”, e.g. 这是我
 contextual clues
 same sound /words using the words or explanations 家。
 ·Answers questions about text
 ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Identifies rhythm and rhyme Vocabulary in context
 text
 ·Performs song/selected lines ·Breaks up words into syllables
 ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the
 Plays a language game text
 ·Follows instructions correctly
 Reads and solves a word puzzle(for
 ·Uses vocabulary
 enrichment)
 Practises Listening and Speaking for

 40
 GRADE 4

 TERM 1

Week Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Spells words correctly
 enrichment
 ·Shows understanding of meanings of
 (choose one for daily practice)
 words
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or
 song Practises reading
 ·Responds physically to instructions ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, rhythm and expression
 ·Plays a simple language game
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 ·Expresses basic emotional response
 (likes and dislikes ) to texts read.

 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story Introduce script Working with pinyin

 Choose from contemporary realistic Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Writes a short message in pinyin ·Builds phonic knowledge of syllables
 ·Chooses appropriate content and tones
 fiction/traditional stories/personal Resource File (TRF)

 41
 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Pre-reading and discussion: predicting ·Addresses text to a person
 accounts/ adventure/real life stories Working with characters
 from title and pictures ·Ends with own name
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·answers questions about the story
 Resource File (TRF) Records words and their meanings in Working with sentences
 ·Identifies setting and character
 ·Predicts what will happen next pinyin in a personal dictionary ·Understands and uses sentences
 ·Answers simple questions Does comprehension activity on the ·Uses drawings or sentences/phrases with“有”and “没有” ,e.g. 我有一个弟
 ·Names characters in the story correctly text (oral) using the words or explanations to show 弟，没有哥哥。
 ·Discusses new vocabulary from the the meaning, etc.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for read text Vocabulary in context
 enrichment ·Uses a dictionary
 (choose one for daily practice)
 Practises reading
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 song
 pronunciation, expression and tempo
 ·Responds physically to instructions
 ·Plays a simple language game
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics

3-4 Listens to information text e.g. simple Reads information text with visuals Writes information text with support Working with pinyin
 topics e.g. Communication at the garage e.g. /pictures/maps/drawings and (in a frame) in pinyin ·Builds phonic knowledge of syllables
 or supermarket photographs ·Fills in missing words in a written tones, and neutral tones
 text/summary
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Working with characters
 ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Uses some new words from the read
 ·Identifies specific details ·Pre-reading and discussion: predicting
 text Working with sentences
 ·Relates to personal experience/ from title and pictures/visuals
 ·Understands and uses commonly used
 Designs a visual text e.g. a poster

 42
 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Code switches if necessary ·Asks and answers simple questions measure words ,e.g. 一只小狗
 advertising an event
 ·Listens to and responds to simple ·Discusses main idea ·Introduce script Vocabulary in context
 oral conversation/instructions / ·Interprets the information in the visuals ·Selects appropriate information
 description
 Reads a visual text e.g. a poster ·Uses the correct format
 Follows the Instructions/ description
 advertising an event ·Uses design basic features such as
 Shows understanding of vocabulary ·Pre-reading: discusses pictures colour and different sizes or kinds of
 relating to conversation / instructions / print (font)
 ·Interprets the information
 description Records words and their meanings in
 ·Discusses the purpose of the text
 Listens to a description and describes ·Discusses some of the language used pinyin in a personal dictionary
 an object ·Uses drawings or sentences/phrases
 ·Identifies and discusses design
 ·Identifies the object described correctly using the words or explanations to
 features such as colour and different
 show the meaning, etc.
 ·Uses words that correctly describe the sizes or kinds of print (font)
 object
 ·Uses some new words
 ·Uses adjectives

 Practises Listening and Speaking

 (choose one for daily practice)
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or
 song
 ·Responds physically to instructions
 ·Plays a simple language game
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics

 43
 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

5-6 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a short message/notes in Working with pinyin

 Choose from traditional stories/personal Text from the textbook or Teacher’s pinyin ·Builds phonic knowledge of syllables
 ·Chooses appropriate content tones, and neutral tones
 accounts/ adventure/real life stories Resource File (TRF)
 ·Pre-reading and discussion: predicting ·Addresses text to a person Working with characters
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 from title and pictures ·Ends with own name ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Resource File (TRF)
 ·answers questions about the story
 ·Predicts what will happen next Records words and their meanings in Working with sentences
 ·Introduces setting and character
 ·Answers simple questions pinyin in a personal dictionary ·Understands and uses sentences with
 ·Names characters in the story Does comprehension activity on the ·Uses drawings or sentences/phrases adjective predicates ,e.g. 她很漂亮。
 using the words or explanations to
 ·Identifies characters from oral text (oral) ·Understands and uses measure
 show the meaning, etc.
 descriptions ·Discusses new vocabulary from the words,e.g. 一个人。
 read text
 Practises Listening and Speaking
 ·Uses a dictionary
 (choose one for daily practice) Vocabulary in context
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or Practises reading
 song ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, expression and tempo
 ·Responds physically to instructions
 ·Plays a simple language game
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics

7-8 Listens to and carries out basic Reads basic procedural (instructions) Introduce script Working with pinyin
 instructions e.g. recipe/instructions for text e.g. a recipe/instructions for doing or Writes about a procedure with support ·Builds phonic knowledge of syllables
 making or doing something making something tones, and neutral tones
 in pinyin
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Working with characters

 44
 GRADE 4

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Discusses specific details of text ·Pre-reading with discussion: predicting ·Fills details into a frame Working with sentences
 ·Asks questions to obtain information from title and pictures ·Uses specific details ·Understands and uses “在”as a verb,
 ·Discusses specific details of text
 ·Listens and responds appropriately ·Stays on topic in a frame e.g. 我家在约堡。
 ·Discusses sequence of instructions ·Uses appropriate grammar, and
 Gives instructions (at least two steps) Vocabulary in context
 punctuation
 ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 ·Records words and their meanings in a
 ·Introduces the uses of verbs
 personal dictionary
 ·Gives instructions in the correct
 sequence Labels and/or completes a visual text
 e.g. /drawing/
 Practises Listening and Speaking
 /pictures/cartoons/maps/photographs
 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Listens /read information Includes
 ·Responds physically to instructions specific details
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions / ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 directions
 ·Writes labels in correct place
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics
 Records words and their meanings in
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Uses drawings or sentences/phrases
 /words-or explanations to show the
 meaning, etc.

9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 45
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listens to information text e.g. simple Reads information text with visuals Introduce script Working with pinyin
 topics e.g. My family Text from the e.g. /pictures/maps/drawings and Labels and/or completes a visual text ·Bi- syllables, tone changes
 textbook or Teacher’s Resource File photographs e.g. Working with characters
 (TRF) Text from the textbook or Teacher’s drawing /pictures / cartoons / maps / ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Identifies specific details
 Resource File (TRF) photographs
 ·Relates to personal experience/ Working with sentences
 ·Pre-reading and discussion: predicting ·Listens /read information Includes
 ·Understands and uses negative forms
 ·Code switches if necessary from title and pictures/visuals specific details
 of action verbs. e.g. 她不喝牛奶。
 ·Asks and answers simple questions ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 Listens to and responds to simple oral
 ·Discusses main idea Vocabulary in context
 / description ·Writes labels in correct place
 ·Follows the /description ·Interprets the information in the visuals
 Records words and their meanings in
 ·Shows understanding of vocabulary Does comprehension activity on the pinyin in a personal dictionary
 relating to description text (oral) ·Uses drawings or sentences/words/
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Reads a simple text. phrases to show the meaning, etc.
 enrichment ·Discusses main ideas

 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Responds to simple questions
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or
 Practises reading
 song
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 ·Plays a simple language game pronunciation, expression and tempo
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions/
 directions
 ·Tells own news

 46
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Retells a story heard or read
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics

3-4 Participates in short conversation on Reads information text e.g. a short text Introduce script Working with pinyin
 a familiar topic / story / poem / song Write short information text with ·Bi- syllables, tone changes
 ·Takes turns Working with characters
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s support in pinyin
 ·Stays on topic Resource File (TRF) ·Fills in missing words in a written ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Asks relevant questions ·Pre-reading and discussion: predicts summary/text
 Working with sentences
 from title and pictures ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Understands and uses ellipsis
 ·Answers simple questions e.g. ·Uses some new words from the read
 enrichment questions with “呢” ,e.g. 你呢？
 text
 (Choose one for daily practice) What ? Who? When? Introduce ·Builds on use of “也” ,e.g. 我也要苹
 ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or complex questions Why...? How do
 of words
 果。
 song you think...?
 Records words and their meanings in Vocabulary in context
 ·Plays a simple language game Does comprehension activity on the
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions/ text (oral)
 ·Uses drawings or sentences using the
 directions
 Practises reading words or explanations to show the
 ·Tells own news ·Reads aloud striving for appropriate meaning, etc.
 ·Retells a story heard or read pronunciation, expression and tempo
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics

5-6 Listens to information contained in a Reads information contained in a Introduce script Working with pinyin
 poster poster Reads visual text e.g. poster Designs and produces a visual text ·Bi- syllables, tone changes

 47
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Identifies specific details ·Pre-reading: discusses pictures
 e.g. poster or notice Working with characters
 ·Listens and relates to own experience ·Discusses what the text is about ·Uses the correct format ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Discuss information own words ·Identifies specific information ·Selects appropriate information
 Working with sentences
 ·Code switching ·-Understands the information ·Uses basic design features such as
 ·Builds on the use of “这儿”、“那儿”，
 ·Discusses the purpose of the text colour and different sizes or kinds of
 Listens to a poem/s/song for e.g. 他在那儿。
 print (font)
 ·Discusses some of the language use
 enrichment ·Understands and uses of existential
 ·Discusses what the poem is about ·Identifies and discusses basic design Writes sentences in pinyin
 sentences with “有” ,e.g. 这儿有一盆
 features such as colour and different ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 ·Relates to own experience 花。
 sizes or kinds of print (font)
 ·Identifies rhyme and rhythm Records words and their meanings in
 Vocabulary in context
 Reads a poem/s/song for enrichment a personal dictionary in pinyin
 ·Identifies words which begin with the
 ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and ·Uses drawings or sentences using the
 same sound
 pictures words or explanations to show the
 ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the
 ·Uses reading strategies with support meaning, etc.
 poem
 e.g. prediction, looks at pictures or text
 ·Performs poem/selected lines
 carefully, uses contextual clues
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Identifies rhythm and rhyme
 enrichment ·Breaks up words into syllables
 ·Practises using words that imitate their ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the
 sounds e.g. bees buzz, glass tinkles poem
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics
 Practises reading
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, expression and tempo

 48
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

7-8 Listens to information text e.g. factual Reads information text with visuals Introduce script Working with pinyin
 recount / narrative e.g. maps / pictures / photographs ·Bi- syllables, tone changes
 Labels and/or completes visual text
 Working with characters
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s e.g. maps / pictures / cartoons /
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) photographs / drawings ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Pre-reading: predicting from title and ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 Listens to description of and Working with sentences
 pictures/visuals ·Labels the text correctly
 describes places/plants/ ·Understands and uses special
 ·Uses reading strategies ·Uses correct format for labels e.g. one
 animals/objects questions with “哪儿” ,e.g. 大象在哪
 ·Identifies and comments on main idea or two words only 儿？
 ·Identifies places correctly
 and specific details with support
 Uses words that correctly describe the Records words and their meanings in Vocabulary in context
 place ·Interprets information in the visual text
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Uses some new words Does comprehension activity on the ·Uses drawings or sentences using the
 ·Uses adjectives text (oral or written) words or explanations to show the
 meaning, etc.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 enrichment

 (Choose one for daily practice)
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or
 song
 ·Plays a simple language game
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions/
 directions
 ·Tells own news
 ·Retells a story heard or read
 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics

 49
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

9-10 Listens to a dialogue read aloud or Reads dialogue Introduce script Working with pinyin
 from radio or TV ·Bi- syllables, tone changes
 Writes a dialogue in pinyin using a
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s frame or speech bubbles Working with characters
 Resource File (TRF) ·Selects appropriate words ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Resource File (TRF)
 Introduction to Role playsa character or a ·Pre-reading predicting from title ·Organises the conversation logically
 Working with sentences
 familiar situation ·Identifies the story-line ·Uses the frame correctly ·Understands and uses time adverbials
 ·Selects appropriate content with ·Discusses characters and setting ·Uses direct speech appropriately （e.g. 我星期一有汉语课。）
 support ·Uses vocabulary
 ·Using basic vocabulary to Expressing Vocabulary in context
 ·Uses details accurately feelings stimulated by the text ·Uses appropriate grammar,
 ·Stays on topic ·Discusses features of the text punctuation and spacing
 ·Switches from one language to especially punctuation and format ·Records words and their meanings in a
 another as appropriate personal dictionary
 Practises reading
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Reads aloud with appropriate Records words and their meanings in
 enrichment pronunciation, expression and tempo pinyin in a personal dictionary

 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Uses drawings or sentences using the
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or words or explanations to show the
 meaning, etc.
 song
 ·Plays a simple language game
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions/
 directions
 ·Tells own news
 ·Retells a story heard or read

 50
 GRADE 4

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Emphasize the practice of phonics

 GRADE 4

 TERM 4

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Working with pinyin
1-2 Participates in conversation on a Reads a short text Writes a passage in pinyin with
 ·Liaison of multiple-syllables
 familiar topic ( e.g. The School) Choose from contemporary /traditional structured support
 ·Uses the frame and fill in missing Working with characters
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s stories/personal accounts/
 words ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Resource File (TRF) adventure//real life stories
 ·Uses common vocabulary Working with sentences
 ·Asks relevant questions and responds
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 to questions ·Records words and their meanings in a ·Understands and uses expressions of
 Resource File (TRF) personal dictionary numbers from 1-100.
 ·Maintains the conversation
 ·Pre-reading with support: predicts from ·Understands and uses the plural form
 ·Respects others’ ideas the title and pictures Records words and their meanings n
 of personal pronouns “们”, e.g. 我们、
 ·Answers simple questions pinyin in a personal dictionary
 他们、你们
 ·Uses drawings or sentences using the
 Does comprehension activity on the words or explanations to show the Vocabulary in context
 text (oral) meaning, etc.

 51
 GRADE 4

 TERM 4

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 ·visual texts read

3-4 Listens to simpleannouncements Reads information text with visuals Writes a paragraph or 2 - 3 short Working with pinyin

 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s e.g. maps / pictures / photographs / sentences in pinyin using a frame ·Liaison of multiple-syllables
 cartoons ·Uses common /familiar vocabulary Working with characters
 Resource File (TRF)
 including pronouns, connectors and
 ·Discusses main ideas Text from the textbook or Teacher’s ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 phrases.
 ·Asks t questions Resource File (TRF) Working with sentences
 ·Uses appropriate grammar and
 ·Responds appropriately ·Pre-reading with support: predicts from punctuation ·Understands and uses questions with
 the title and pictures “几”, e.g. 现在几点？
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Answers simple questions of words
 enrichment Vocabulary in context
 Does comprehension activity on the Draws, labels and/or completes a
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 text (oral) visual text e.g. maps / pictures /
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or
 song Reads visual text e.g. poster or notice photographs / cartoons
 ·Plays a simple language game or pamphlet ·Captures the information correctly

 ·Gives and follows simple instructions/ Text from the textbook or Teacher’s ·Shows the links between different
 parts of the visual correctly
 ·directions Resource File (TRF)
 ·Pre-reading: discusses pictures ·Writes sentences describing the visual
 ·Tells own news
 text
 ·Retells a story heard or read ·Discusses what the text is about
 ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 ·Identifies specific information
 ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings

 52
 GRADE 4

 TERM 4

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Interprets the information of words
 ·Discusses the purpose and audience Records words and their meanings in
 of the text
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Discusses some of the language use ·Uses drawings or sentences or words
 Reflects on texts read during or explanations to show the meaning,
 etc.
 independent/pair reading
 ·Retells story or main ideas in 2 to 3
 sentences
 ·Expresses emotional response to texts
 read.

5-6 Listens to a short story with dialogue Reads a story with dialogue Writes a short story in pinyin with Working with pinyin
 structured support ·Liaison of multiple-syllables
 Choose from Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 ·Uses the frame to fill in missing Working with characters
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Pre-reading with support: predicts from ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Resource File (TRF) words/phrases
 the title and pictures ·Uses extended vocabulary including Working with sentences
 ·Predicts what will happen next
 ·Discusses, setting and characters pronouns, connectors and phrases ·Understands and uses the structural
 ·Discusses setting and characters
 ·Discusses main events in the story ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings particle “的”, e.g. 他的朋友、我的生日
 ·Discusses main events in the story
 ·Gives a personal response to the story of words
 ·Gives a personal response to the story Vocabulary in context
 ·Identifies which parts of the story is the Records words and their meanings in
 Practises Listening and Speaking for dialogue pinyin in a personal dictionary
 enrichment ·Role plays the story or a part of the ·Uses drawings or sentences /using the
 (Choose one for daily practice) story words or explanations to show the
 meaning, etc.
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or

 53
 GRADE 4

 TERM 4

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 song or part of a story
 Practises reading
 ·Plays a simple language game ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions/ pronunciation and expression
 ·directions Reflects on texts read during
 ·Tells own news independent/pair reading
 ·Retells a story heard or read ·Relates to own life

 Working with pinyin
7-8 Participates in conversation on a Reads information text on familiar Writes a paragraph / sentences in
 ·Liaison of multiple-syllables
 familiar topic (e.g. My Friends) topic pinyin using a frame or speech
 Working with characters
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s bubbles
 Uses appropriate content ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF)
 ·Uses common vocabulary including Working with sentences
 ·Asks relevant questions and responds ·Pre-reading with support: predicts from
 to questions the title and pictures pronouns, connectors and phrases. ·Understands and uses adverb “真”,
 ·Uses appropriate punctuation e.g. 花园真漂亮。
 ·Maintains the conversation ·Answers simple questions and begins
 ·Respects others’ ideas to ask more complex questions e.g. ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings Vocabulary in context
 Why? How do you think? of words
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Discusses visuals
 Records words and their meanings in
 enrichment
 Does comprehension activity on the pinyin in a personal dictionary
 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Uses drawings or sentences /words or
 text (oral)
 ·Performs a simple rhyme, poem or explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 song or part of a story Reflects on texts read during

 ·Plays a simple language game independent/pair reading
 ·Expresses emotional response to texts
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions/
 read.

 54
 GRADE 4

 TERM 4

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·directions
 ·Tells own news
 ·Retells a story heard or read

9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

3.5.2 Grade 5

 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Working with pinyin
1-2 Listens to a short story Reads a short story Writes a personal (narrative /
 ·Sentence stress and intonation
 (Choose from fiction / traditional stories / Text from the textbook or reader/s or descriptive ) recount of events In
 Working with characters
 personal accounts / adventure / funny / Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) pinyin
 ·Selects from experience ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 fantasy / real life stories / historical [instruction will be repeated every
 ·Chooses appropriate content for the Working with sentences
 fiction) fortnight]
 topic ·“的”structure as a noun phrase, e.g.
 ·Pre-reading: predicting from title and
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s

 55
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 pictures ·Stays on the topic 我喜欢蓝色的。
 Resource File (TRF) [instruction will be
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. making ·Frame used by all learners
 repeated every fortnight] Vocabulary in context
 predictions, uses phonic and
 ·Answers questions ·Uses appropriate grammar and
 contextual clues
 punctuation.
 ·Predicts what will happen next
 ·Discusses new vocabulary from the
 ·Uses vocabulary related to topic
 Retells a story read text
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Retells events in own words correct ·Discusses the title, and where the
 sequence, using simple past story takes place (setting) Writes an opinion on a story (for
 ·Names the characters correctly ·Expresses simple opinion on the story enrichment) in pinyin
 ·Uses a dictionary ·Pre-writing: discusses what they like /
 Practises Listening and Speaking
 dislike
 (Choose one for daily practice) Does comprehension activity on the
 ·Writes 2 sentences to express what
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme text (oral or written) they like / dislike
 ·Plays a simple language game Practises reading ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Gives and follows simple ·Reads aloud with striving towards
 Creates a personal dictionary in pinyin
 instructions/directions appropriate pronunciation, fluency, and
 expression ·Labels pages with letters of alphabet
 ·Tells own news
 ·Enters 5 words and meanings
 Reflects on texts read during
 (drawing/sentence using the
 independent/pair reading word/explanation of word)
 ·Retells story or main ideas in 3 to
 ·Or continues to enter words into
 sentences
 dictionary created in Grade 4
 ·Gives opinion on story
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 56
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Working with pinyin
3-4 Takes part in a conversation about a Reads information text with visuals Writes a factual / descriptive recount
 ·Sentence stress and intonation
 familiar topic e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps/ in pinyin in a frame
 ·Asks and answers simple questions on ·Selects appropriate content Working with characters
 maps/ pictures/ graphs/ photographs/
 the topic ·Sequences events correctly ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 drawings/ cartoons
 ·Code switches if necessary ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 Working with sentences
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Gives other learners a chance to ·Understands and uses commonly used
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Uses appropriate grammar and
 speak measure words, e.g. 三种颜色。
 ·Pre-reading: read and discuss title and punctuation
 ·Listens to them ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 look at pictures / diagrams / maps Vocabulary in context
 Gives a factual / descriptive recount ·Uses reading strategies e.g. for
 Records words and their meanings in
 ·Recounts a recent event general idea, uses contextual clues to
 find meaning pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Tells events in sequence ·Writes sentences using the words or
 ·Identifies main facts
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 ·Explains meaning of unfamiliar words
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 enrichment
 Answers questions about the text
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 Practises reading
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme/or
 ·Reads aloud striving towards
 part of a short story
 appropriate pronunciation, fluency, and
 ·Plays a simple language game expression
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions /
 Reflects on texts read during
 ·directions
 independent/pair reading
 ·Tells own news ·Shares opinions on the text
 ·Relates text to own life

 57
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Working with pinyin
5-6 Listens to a story with dialogue Reads a story. Writes a simple description of people
 ·Sentence stress and intonation
 (Choose from fiction/traditional Text from the textbook or reader/s or In pinyin
 ·Writes at least one paragraph Working with characters
 stories/personal accounts/adventure/ Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Writes creatively ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 /real life stories/ ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and
 pictures Working with sentences
 ·Uses appropriate adjectives
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. makes ·Uses adverb “太”and the
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 Resource File (TRF) structure“太……了”, e.g. 太大了。
 predictions, uses contextual clues to
 ·Uses an oral description to identify find meaning, reads to find detail Writes a short message in pinyin
 people in the story Vocabulary in context
 ·Answers questions about the story ·Organises information
 ·Expresses feelings and opinions about ·Uses correct format e.g. salutation,
 the story Reads social texts e.g. invitations
 date, etc.
 ·Answers oral questions about the story ·Discusses purpose of text
 ·Constructs sentences correctly
 ·Uses a dictionary to find meaning of
 Role play: familiar situations ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 new words
 ·Participates in dialogue
 Writes a paragraph in pinyin
 ·Includes relevant information Practises reading
 ·Describes an event
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 ·Uses correct tense ·Uses connectors
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 Reflects on texts read during
 enrichment
 independent/pair reading Records words and their meanings in
 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Uses words to express feelings about pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme the text read ·Writes sentences using the words or
 ·Plays a simple language game explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 ·Gives and follows simple instructions / ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 directions

 58
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Tells own news

 Working with pinyin
7-8 Listens to and carries out instructions Reads procedural Writes instructions in pinyin within a
 ·Sentence stress and intonation
 e.g. for making or doing something. (instructions ) text frame
 ·Uses correct specific details Working with characters
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Uses correct structure and format ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Working with sentences
 ·Responds correctly to instructions, ·Pre-reading: predicting from title and ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Uses the structure“会/不会+Verb
 ·Follows sequence correctly pictures Records words and their meanings in phrase”, e.g. 我会游泳，不会打网球。
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. prediction, pinyin in a personal dictionary
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 contextual clues Vocabulary in context
 enrichment ·Writes sentences using the words or
 ·Discusses specific details of text explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 ·Discusses sequence of instructions ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme/song
 ·Carries out instructions (if possible)
 ·Tells own news
 Does comprehension activity on the
 text (oral or written)

 Practises reading
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 ·Gives short oral review
 ·Includes key points e.g. title, and /

 59
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 topic
 ·Gives personal opinion of text

9-10 Listens to a poem/song Reads poem/songs Writes a passage in pinyin about Working with pinyin
 poem/s ·Sentence stress and intonation
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Discusses what passage is about
 Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Working with characters
 ·Talks about the poem /song (what ·Discusses the topic and main ideas in ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 poem is about) the poem
 Records words and their meanings in Working with sentences
 ·Relates to own experience ·Discusses rhyme
 pinyin in a personal dictionary ·Understands and uses duplication of
 ·Identifies rhyme and rhythm ·Discusses words that begin with the ·Writes sentences using the words or measure words, e.g. 个个、件件。
 ·Gives personal response (likes / same sound explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 dislikes the poem) ·Discusses words that imitate their Vocabulary in context
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 sound
 Performs the poem for enrichment
 ·Discusses comparisons e.g. “He sings
 ·Pronounces words correctly
 like a bird.”, “She is a star.”
 ·Shows understanding
 ·Answers questions about the poem/s
 ·Conveys rhythm (oral or written)

 Practises reading
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 expression, showing understanding
 ·Uses good pronunciation, phrasing
 and tempo

 Reflects on texts read during

 60
 GRADE 5

 TERM 1

 Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 independent/pair reading
 Compares e.g. stories / texts / poems /
 songs read

 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a simple a paragraph in piny Working with characters

 (Choose from fiction/traditional Text from the textbook or reader/s or with a frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Writes an appropriate opening
 stories/personal accounts/) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Working with words
 sentence
 ·Pre-reading: reads with support and ·Uses the dictionary to check spelling
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 discusses title and looks at pictures ·Writes about events logically
 and meanings of words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. making ·Uses connectors (and, but) ·Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Resource File (TRF)
 predictions, using contextual clues ·Uses some adjectives and first letters of a word to find words
 ·Answers questions
 ·Discusses new vocabulary ·Writes an appropriate ending in a dictionary.
 ·Answers simple questions
 ·Identifies sequence of events, setting ·Uses learnt characters if possible. Working with sentences
 Takes part in a conversation on a and characters ·Understands and uses adjective“好
 Records words and their meanings in
 familiar topic, code-switching if ·Uses a dictionary +V” , e.g. 电影真好看。
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 necessary Vocabulary in context
 Does comprehension activity on the

 61
 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Asks and answers question ·Writes sentences using the words or
 text (oral or written)
 ·Respects other learners by listening to explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Practises reading
 them ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 ·Discusses a short story

3-4 Listens to information text e.g. oral Reads information text with visuals Writes a short description of objects / Working with characters
 description/s of object/s/ plants / animals e.g. charts / tables / diagrams/ mind plants / animals / places in pinyin ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 / places maps/ maps / pictures / graphs / using a frame (3-4 sentences)
 Working with words
 photographs/ drawings / cartoons ·Uses the frame correctly
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s ·Uses knowledge of alphabetical order
 Resource File (TRF) Text from the textbook or reader/s or ·Includes specific details and first letters of a word to find words
 ·Identifies the object/s ·Uses relevant vocabulary in a dictionary.
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Describes what it/they are used for ·Pre-reading: predicting from title and ·Punctuation is correct Working with sentences
 ·Draw and label it pictures/visuals ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Understands and uses the
 ·Uses reading strategies
 Practises Listening and Speaking Records words and their meanings in comparative structure with“比”, e.g. 他
 ·Read for specific information e.g.
 pinyin in a personal dictionary 比我高。
 (Choose one for daily practice) timetables or schedules
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme ·Writes sentences using the words or Vocabulary in context
 ·Answers questions on text and visuals
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Plays a simple language game
 Does comprehension activity on the ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions /
 text (oral or written)
 directions
 ·Tells own news Practises reading

 62
 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Tells of own related experiences ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 ·Retells a text read

5-6 Takes part in a conversation about a Reads stories. Writes a passage in pinyin using a Working with characters
 familiar topic (e. g. Role models ) frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Asks and answers simple questions on ·Writes at least two paragraphs in a
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Working with words
 the topic frame
 ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and ·Uses the dictionary to check
 ·Code switches if necessary pictures ·Links paragraphs using connectors meanings of words
 ·Gives other learners a chance to ·Reads for detail and uses contextual ·Uses new vocabulary and punctuation
 Working with sentences
 speak clues to find information learnt
 ·Builds on understanding and use of
 ·Listens to them ·Identifies and comments on the ·Uses appropriate grammar,
 time adverbial, e.g. 我每天六点起床。
 message punctuation and spaces between
 Gives a factual / descriptive recount paragraphs
 ·Understands the vocabulary Vocabulary in context
 ·Recounts a recent event
 ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Tells events in sequence ·Answers questions on the story
 of words
 ·Retells story in own words (oral or
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 writing)
 enrichment Records words and their meanings in
 Does comprehension activity on the
 (Choose one for daily practice) pinyin in a personal dictionary
 text (oral or written)
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme/or ·Writes sentences using the words or
 part of a short story Practises reading explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Plays a simple language game ·Reads aloud with appropriate ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 pronunciation, fluency, and expression
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions /

 63
 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 directions
 ·Tells own news
 ·Diagram or table about the story

7-8 Listens to and responds to oral Reads procedural (instructions) text Writes a recipe in pinyin using a frame Working with characters
 instructions e.g. a recipe or instructions for making or ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 ·Text from the textbook or reader/s or doing something Resource File (TRF) Working with words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Follows
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or ·Uses the frame correctly ·Uses the dictionary to check
 the instructions
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Includes list of ingredients meanings of words
 ·Shows understanding of command
 words ·Pre-reading: predicting from title and ·Includes method in correct sequence Working with sentences
 pictures
 ·Uses appropriate vocabulary ·Understands and use the converbal
 Role plays familiar situations e.g. giving ·Uses reading strategies
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. structure, e.g. 我去图书馆看书。
 instructions
 ·Answers questions on the text
 ·Gives at least 4 2 directions / Records words and their meanings in Vocabulary in context
 ·Follows the instructions correctly
 instructions in the correct sequence
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Uses appropriate language / Does comprehension activity on the ·Writes sentences using the words or
 vocabulary and gestures e.g. direction text (oral or written) explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 words, the command form of the verb
 Practises reading ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 enrichment pronunciation, fluency, and expression

 (Choose one for daily practice) Reflects on texts read during
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme or independent/pair reading
 part of a story
 ·Compares texts read
 ·Plays a simple language game
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions /

 64
 GRADE 5

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 directions

9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listens to oral description of places / Reads a story Rewrites the a paragraph/passage in Working with characters
 people (Choose from contemporary realistic own words, using a frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or ·Identifies the main events
 fiction/traditional stories/personal Working with words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 accounts/adventure/funny/fantasy/real ·Tells the events in the correct order ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 ·Identifies places/people
 life stories/historical fiction) ·Uses appropriate grammar, and high frequency words.
 ·Notes relevant information from a story punctuation and spaces between ·Uses the dictionary to check
 e.g. on a chart / table Text from the textbook or reader/s or paragraphs meanings of words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 Listens to and gives personal
 ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and Working with sentences
 recounts pictures Records words and their meanings in ·Understands and uses the existential
 ·Recalls own experiences Answers a personal dictionary sentence, e.g.房间里有一张床。
 ·Understands the features of the text
 questions about what happened first,
 ·Writes sentences using the words or ·Understands and uses the directional
 second, etc. ·Uses reading strategies e.g. uses
 explanations to show the meaning, etc. phrase with “里”,e.g. 房间里。
 contextual clues to determine meaning,

 65
 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 makes inferences ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 Practises Listening and Speaking Vocabulary in context
 ·Answers questions about the story
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 ·Identifies characters
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme or
 song or part of a short story Does comprehension activity on the
 ·Plays a simple language game text (oral or written)
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions /
 Practises reading
 directions
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 ·Tells own news pronunciation, fluency and expression

 Reads a short paragraph
 ·Discusses main idea and specific
 details

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 ·Discussion on text studied

3-4 Talks about a familiar topic with Reads information texts with visuals Draws/completes and labels simple Working with characters
 preparation e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps / visual texts e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Plans and prepares important points maps / pictures / graphs / photographs / mind maps/ maps/pictures/graphs/ Working with words
 ·Says at least 3 sentences on the topic drawings / cartoons photographs/drawings/ cartoons ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 Answers questions and high frequency words.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 Practises Listening and Speaking Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF) ·Uses the dictionary to check
 ·Pre-reading: focuses on important ·Uses information from a visual or meanings of words.
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 details written text
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme or Working with sentences

 66
 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 song or part of the story ·Discusses main information given ·Organises information ·Begins to use “在+directional words”,
 ·Plays a simple language game Selects relevant details to answer ·Gives information e.g. 卧室在南边，客厅在东边。
 questions
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions / Vocabulary in context
 Makes a mind map summary of a
 directions Does comprehension activity on the
 short text
 ·Tells own news text (oral or written)
 ·Identifies at least three main points
 Practises reading
 Records words and their meanings in
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency and expression pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Writes sentences using the words or
 Reflects on texts read during explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 independent/pair reading ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Retells a text in about 3 sentences.

5-6 Listens to stories Reads a story Writes a simple story in pinyin in a Working with characters

 (Choose from contemporary realistic Text from the textbook or reader/s or frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 fiction/traditional stories/personal Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Writes an story Working with words
 ·Discusses characters ·Story has a beginning, a middle and an
 accounts/adventure/funny/fantasy/real ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 ·Answers questions about story ending
 life stories/historical fiction) and high frequency words.
 ·Identifies the moral/main message of ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or ·Uses the dictionary to check
 the story Records words and their meanings in meanings of words.
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Understands stories, answering Does comprehension activity on the a personal dictionary in pinyin. Working with sentences
 questions text (oral or written) ·Writes sentences using the words or ·Begins to use the directional phrase
 ·Expresses own opinion explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 Reads poem/s or song/s “……上”, e.g. 桌子上。
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 Retells the story ·Discusses topic and main idea ·Builds on the use of predicatively used

 67
 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Refers to main characters Adjective predicates, e.g. 你家的花园
 Practises reading
 ·Retelling of story in own words ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 真漂亮。

 ·Uses tenses introduced in previous pronunciation, fluency and expression ·Builds on the use of exclamation
 grades marks.
 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading Vocabulary in context
 ·Relates texts to own life

7-8 Takes part in a conversation on a Reads procedural text e.g. instructions Writes in pinyin on a information text Working with characters
 familiar topic (e.g. the weather) Text from the textbook or reader/s or previously used ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Asks and answers questions Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Writes one to two paragraphs
 Working with words
 ·Respects other learners by listening to ·Finds specific details ·Organises information logically
 ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 them ·Interprets visuals ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings and high frequency words.
 ·Code switches if necessary ·Discusses the sequence of words
 ·Uses the dictionary to check
 ·Uses the writing process with support meanings of words.
 Practises Listening and Speaking Practises reading
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Reads aloud with appropriate Working with sentences
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme or pronunciation, fluency and expression Records words and their meanings in ·Understands and uses the modal
 song or a part of a story
 Does comprehension activity on the pinyin in a personal dictionary verbs “要” and “想” , e.g. 你要买什么？
 ·Plays a simple language game ·Writes sentences using the words or 你想吃什么？
 text (oral or written)
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions / explanations to show the meaning, etc. ·Develops understanding and use of
 directions ·Uses learnt characters if possible. the structure “Numeral + Measure word
 ·Tells own news +Noun”, e.g. 一瓶水、两块披萨。

 Vocabulary in context

 68
 GRADE 5

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

9-10 Takes part in a conversation on a Reads a text Writes a short dialogue in pinyin using Working with characters
 familiar topic Text from the textbook or reader/s or a frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Asks and answers questions ·Selects appropriate characters
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Working with words
 ·Respects other learners by listening to ·Pre-reading: predicting from title ·Organises the dialogue logically ·Reinforces Numerals and Measure
 them ·Uses direct speech
 ·Uses reading strategies with support words.
 ·Code switches if necessary ·Uses an informal style of writing ·Uses the dictionary to check
 ·Identifies the story-line
 ·Asks and answers more complex ·Uses appropriate punctuation e.g. meanings of words.
 ·Discusses characters, setting Does
 questions e.g. What would you do…? colon, exclamation and question mark
 comprehension activity on the text Working with sentences
 Performs simple role plays (oral or written) ·Uses writing process ·Revises directional phrases.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Practises reading ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Revises the structure “Numeral +
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Reads aloud with expression, showing Measure word +Noun”.
 Records words and their meanings in
 ·Develops sensible story line understanding of the text
 a personal dictionary in pinyin. Vocabulary in context
 ·Pronounces words audibly and ·Reads aloud using proper
 ·Writes sentences using the words or
 correctly pronunciation, pacing and volume.
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 Practises Listening and Speaking for Reflects on texts read independently ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Compares texts read
 enrichment

 (Choose one for daily practice)
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme or
 song or a part of a story
 ·Plays a simple language game
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions /
 directions
 Tells own news

 69
 GRADE 5

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story or poem or song Writes a recount of events in pinyin Working with characters
 ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 (Choose from /traditional stories/personal Text from the textbook or reader/s or Relates event
 accounts/adventure / real life stories / Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Starts to classify the characters with
 the same radicals.
 historical fiction) ·Pre-reading: predicts from the title and
 Writes a simple story / paragraph /
 pictures Working with words
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or passage in a frame in pinyin.
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. uses ·Words with the same characters
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Uses story structure
 contextual clues to find the meaning of ·Starts to write words in characters if
 ·Understands stories new words ·Links sentences into a coherent
 learnt. (should this not read “Starts to
 ·Answers questions paragraph using pronouns, connectors
 ·Discusses main idea and other details. write words in pinyin?”
 and correct punctuation
 ·Asks relevant questions and responds ·Identifies the sequence of events
 to questions ·Uses correct tense Uses the dictionary Working with sentences
 ·Identifies the setting and characters to check spelling and meanings of ·Understands and uses questions with
 ·Answers and begins to ask some more
 ·Answers simple question and begins to words “多少”, e.g. 多少钱？
 complex questions e.g. Why couldn’t
 …? What…?; How do you think …?
 ask some more complex questions e.g. ·Uses the following writing process with ·Understands and uses expressions of
 Why couldn’t …?; support the sum of money in RMB.
 What…?; How do you think …? ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Sentences with nouns predicates, e.g
 三斤苹果十块钱。
 Does comprehension activity on the Records words and their meanings in
 text (oral or written) a personal dictionary in pinyin. Vocabulary in context
 ·Writes sentences using the words or
 Practises reading
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency and expression ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading

 70
 GRADE 5

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Discusses texts studied

3-4 Participates in discussion Reads text Writes information text in pinyin using Working with characters
 ·Discusses familiar topics a frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Takes turns, shows respect for others, ·Selects a relevant topic ·Starts to classify the characters with
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 respects others opinions ·Includes relevant information the same radicals.
 ·Pre-reading: predicts what text is about
 Practises Listening and Speaking by previewing it ·Uses the following writing process with Working with words
 ·Answers questions support ·Words with the same characters
 (Choose one for daily practice)
 ·Discusses main ideas and specific ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Stars to write words in characters if
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme or
 song details learnt.
 Uses the dictionary to check
 ·Plays a simple language game Does comprehension activity on the ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 meanings of words
 of words
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions / text (oral or written) Designs a poster
 directions Working with sentences
 Practises reading ·Includes relevant information
 ·Tells own news ·Builds on understanding and use of
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate ·Includes a picture
 comparative structures .
 pronunciation, fluency and expression
 ·Uses print sizes effectively
 ·Understands and uses the structure “A
 Reads and understands a poster ·Presents neat, legible, final draft 比 B + adj. +一点儿”, e.g. 这件衣服比那
 ·Pre-reading: discusses pictures 件大一点儿。
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Interprets the information
 Records words and their meanings in Vocabulary in context
 ·Discusses the text
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 71
 GRADE 5

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

5-6 Listens to a story Reads a story Using pinyin write a recount of events Working with characters

 (Choose from /traditional stories/personal Text from the textbook or reader/s or in a frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Relates events in sequence ·Starts to classify the characters with
 accounts//real life stories/historical Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 fiction) ·Pre-reading: predicts from the title and ·Uses appropriate grammar, the same radicals (what is a radical).
 pictures vocabulary, and information.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Working with words
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. uses ·Uses the writing process with support
 ·Words with the same characters
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Identifies
 contextual clues to find the meaning of ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 plot, characters and actions ·Starts to write words in characters if
 new words
 learnt.
 ·Answer questions ·Discusses main idea and other details.
 Uses the dictionary to check
 meanings of words ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 Tells same story in own words with ·Identifies the sequence of events of words
 support ·Identifies the setting and characters Records words and their meanings in
 pinyin in a personal dictionary Working with sentences
 ·Sequence of story makes sense ·Answers and begins to ask some more
 ·Writes sentences using the words or ·Builds on understanding and use of
 complex questions e.g. Why couldn’t
 Practises Listening and Speaking explanations to show the meaning, etc. comparative structures.
 … ?; What…? How do you think …?
 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Understands and uses the structure “A
 Reads poem/s 跟 B 一样” and “A 跟 B 一样+ adj.”, e.g.
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme or
 song ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and 这件衣服跟那件衣服一样大。
 pictures
 ·Plays a simple language game Vocabulary in context
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. uses
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions /
 contextual clues
 directions
 ·Answers questions about the poem
 ·Tells own news
 ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the
 ·Recalls events or experiences in the
 poem

 72
 GRADE 5

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 right sequence ·Discusses rhyme, words that begin
 with the same sounds and
 comparisons

 Practises reading
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency and expression

7-8 Takes part in a conversation Designs a poster Working with characters
 ·Asks and answers questions ·Includes relevant information ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Respects other learners ·Includes a picture ·Starts to classify the characters with
 ·Listens to them and encourages them ·Uses print sizes effectively the same radicals.
 to speak ·Presents neat, legible, final draft Working with words
 ·Code switches if necessary ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Words with the same characters

 Practises Listening and Speaking ·Starts to write words in characters if
 Writes information text In pinyin using
 learnt.
 (Choose one for daily practice) a frame
 ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Performs a short poem or rhyme or ·Selects appropriate information
 of words
 song
 ·Writes one to two paragraphs
 ·Plays a simple language game Working with sentences
 ·Uses correct punctuation
 ·Gives and follows simple instructions / ·Understands and uses the affirmative
 ·Uses connectors –negative questions “adj 不 adj”, e.g.
 directions
 ·Uses the writing process with support 那件衣服贵不贵？
 ·Tells own news
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 Vocabulary in context

 73
 GRADE 5

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 74
 3.5.3 Grade 6

 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listens to a short story Reads a short story Writes a paragraph in pinyin with Working with characters
 support ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 (Choose from contemporary realistic (Choose from contemporary realistic
 ·Uses a frame ·Starts to classify the characters with
 fiction/traditional stories/personal fiction/traditional stories/personal
 ·Writes an appropriate opening the same radicals.
 accounts/adventure/ funny/fantasy/real accounts/adventure/funny / fantasy/real
 sentence with support ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 life stories/historical fiction) life stories/historical fiction)
 ·Uses connectors by radicals.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Writes an appropriate ending with Working with words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) support ·Words with the same characters
 ·Answers questions to show ·Pre-reading with support: predicts from
 ·Uses appropriate grammar, ·Starts to write words in characters if
 understanding title and pictures
 vocabulary, spelling and learnt.
 ·Gives a personal response to the ·Uses reading strategies e.g. making punctuation
 story, predictions, uses phonic and ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. of words
 contextual clues
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 ·Discusses new vocabulary from the Uses the writing process with support ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 enrichment and high frequency words
 read text ·Brainstorms ideas
 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Discusses the title, and where the ·Writes a first draft Working with sentences
 ·Performs a poem story takes place (setting) ·Builds on use of the affirmative –
 ·Revises
 ·Plays a language game ·Answers simple questions on the story negative questions “是不是”, e.g.他是
 ·Edits
 ·Gives and follows instructions / 不是老师？
 Practises reading ·Writes final draft
 directions
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate ·Presents neat, legible final draft Vocabulary in context
 ·Discusses a topic

 75
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 pronunciation, fluency and expression ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Words taken from shared or
 individually read texts
 Records words and their meanings in
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

3-4 Sustains a conversation on a familiar Reads a simple descriptive / narrative Writes a simple personal note or Working with characters
 topic (e.g. Body and Health) recount Text from the textbook or message in pinyin ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Asks and answers questions reader/s or Teacher’s Resource File ·Reinforces the features of a personal ·Starts to classify the characters with
 ·Respects other learners by listening to note / message the same radicals.
 (TRF)
 them ·Pre-reading with support : predicts ·Uses a frame ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 from title and pictures ·Directs message at appropriate person by radicals.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. making ·Edits own writing with support by Working with words
 enrichment
 predictions, uses pictures / phonic and correcting grammar, punctuation errors ·Words with the same characters
 (Choose one for daily practice) contextual clues
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Starts to write words in characters if
 ·Performs a poem ·Discusses new vocabulary from the
 Uses the writing process with support learnt.
 ·Plays a language game read text
 ·Brainstorms ideas ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Discusses a familiar topic ·Answers simple questions on text
 of words
 ·Writes a first draft
 Does comprehension activity on the ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 ·Revises
 text (oral or written) and high frequency words
 ·Edits
 Reflects on texts read during Working with sentences
 ·Writes final draft

 76
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Presents neat, legible final draft ·Understands and uses the adverbial of
 independent/pair reading
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. place “在+ place”, e.g.他在医院工作。
 ·Shares opinions on the text
 ·Builds on the use of the question with
 Records words and their meanings in
 “哪儿”, e.g. 他在哪儿工作？
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Writes sentences using the words or Vocabulary in context
 explanations to show the meaning, etc. ·Words taken from shared or
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. individually read texts

5-6 Listens to a story Reads a text Writes for personal reflection in pinyin Working with characters
 e.g. a diary using a frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 (Choose from contemporary realistic (Choose from contemporary /traditional
 ·Introduce and discuss the features of ·Starts to classify the characters with
 fiction/traditional stories/personal stories/personal accounts/adventure/real
 the diary the same radicals.
 accounts/adventure//real life stories/ Text life stories) e.g. a diary/diary entries
 ·Uses the frame ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 from the textbook or reader/s or Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Uses an informal style by radicals.
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Tells the events in order Working with words
 Summarises story with support in a ·Pre-reading with support: predicts from
 ·Uses connectors ·Words with the same characters
 frame title and pictures
 ·Understands basic questions ·Uses reading strategies with support ·Uses appropriate grammar and ·Starts to write words in characters if
 e.g. makes predictions, uses phonic punctuation learnt.
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 and contextual clues ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 enrichment ·Discusses new vocabulary from the of words
 (Choose one for daily practice) read text ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 Records words and their meanings in and high frequency words
 ·Performs a poem or a part of a story ·Answers questions on text
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Plays a language game Working with sentences
 Practises reading ·Writes sentences using the words or

 77
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Discusses a familiar topic ·Reads aloud with appropriate explanations to show the meaning, etc. ·Builds on uses of “想+Verb phrase”,
 pronunciation, fluency, pacing and ·Uses learnt characters if possible. e.g.他想做老师。
 expression
 ·Understand and uses simple questions
 Reflects on texts read during ending with “吧”, e.g. 你是演员吧？
 independent/pair reading ·Understands and uses “您”, e.g. 您是
 ·Discusses own feelings 校长吧？

 Vocabulary in context
 ·Words taken from shared or
 individually read texts

7-8 Listens to and discusses basic Reads procedural text e.g. instructions completes visual text e.g. diagrams / Working with characters
 instructions pictures / graphs / ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 with visuals e.g. diagrams / pictures /
 ·Responds physically to simple ·Starts to classify the characters with
 graphs / photographs / photographs /drawings
 instructions the same radicals.
 ·Adds correct labels
 drawings
 ·Uses connectors ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 ·Includes relevant information
 ·Uses the correct order Text from the textbook or reader/s or by radicals.
 ·Uses key words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 Practises Listening and Speaking for Working with words
 ·Pre-reading with support: predicts from ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Words with the same characters
 enrichment title, pictures and headings
 Records words and their meanings In ·Starts to write words in characters if
 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Uses reading strategies with
 pinyin in a personal dictionary learnt.
 ·Performs a poem or song or a part of a support :Discusses some visual
 ·Writes sentences using the words or ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 story features Interprets information in the
 explanations to show the meaning, etc. of words
 visual text
 ·Plays a language game ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Follows instructions ·Builds on knowledge of sight words

 78
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Gives and follows instructions / and high frequency words
 Practises reading
 directions
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate Working with sentences
 ·Discusses a topic pronunciation, fluency, pacing and ·Begins to use the adverb “不A也不B”,
 expression e.g. 南非的天气不冷也不热。
 Does comprehension activity on the ·Start to understand and use “了”, e.g.
 text (oral or written) 下雨了。

 Does a word puzzle for enrichment Vocabulary in context
 ·Uses relevant vocabulary ·Words taken from shared or
 ·Spells words correctly individually read texts

 ·Explains meanings of words/uses them
 in a sentence

 79
 GRADE 6

 TERM 1

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

9-10 Listens to poems/songs Reads poems Writes a description of a person / an Working with characters
 object / animal / plant / place in pinyin ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 ·Selects appropriate content ·Starts to classify the characters with
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF)
 ·Focuses on physical description the same radicals.
 ·Uses an oral description to identify ·Discusses topic and main idea
 people or objects ·Writes creatively, using adjectives and ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 ·Understands in a simple way some
 adverbs by radicals.
 Plays a language game for enrichment elements of poetry e.g. rhyme,
 alliteration, ·Edits own writing, correcting spelling Working with words
 ·Gives and follows instructions correctly
 ·Discusses new vocabulary from the errors ·Words with the same characters
 ·Takes turns
 read text ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Starts to write words in characters if
 ·Completes the game in the time
 ·Uses a dictionary learnt.
 allocated Records words and their meanings in
 Does comprehension activity on the ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 of words
 text (oral or written) ·Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc. ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 Practises reading and high frequency words
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 pronunciation, fluency and expression Working with sentences
 Uses the writing process with support
 ·Begins to use the adverb “常” and “常
 ·Brainstorms ideas
 常”, e.g. 春天常下雨。
 ·Writes a first draft
 ·Understand and uses “最+Adj.”, e.g.
 ·Revises 秋天的天气最好。
 ·Edits
 Vocabulary in context
 ·Writes final draft
 ·Words taken from shared or
 ·Presents neat, legible final draft individually read texts
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 80
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a simple story in pinyin using Working with characters
 a frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 (Choose from contemporary realistic Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Uses story structure as a frame ·Starts to classify the characters with
 fiction/traditional stories/personal Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Writes an appropriate opening the same radicals.
 accounts/adventure/ funny/fantasy/real ·Pre-reading: reads and discusses title
 and looks at pictures sentence ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 life stories/historical fiction)
 ·Uses connectors by radicals.
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. makes
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 predictions, using contextual clues ·Uses some adjectives Working with words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Discusses new vocabulary ·Writes an appropriate ending ·Words with the same characters
 ·Answers literal questions
 ·Identifies sequence of events, setting ·Stays on the topic ·Starts to write words in characters if
 ·Notes relevant information
 and characters (e.g. describes learnt.
 ·Links sentences into a coherent
 ·Tells and retells stories characters’ feelings, and talks about
 paragraph using pronouns, connectors ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 reasons for their actions)
 Practises Listening and Speaking for and correct punctuation of words
 ·Expresses cause and effect
 enrichment ·Uses appropriate grammar punctuation ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 ·Uses a dictionary and high frequency words
 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 Does comprehension activity on the of words Working with sentences
 ·Performs a poem
 text (oral or written) ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Builds on use of “在+place +Verb”,
 ·Plays a language game
 e.g. 我在湖边打太极拳。
 ·Gives and follows instructions / Practises reading Writes a paragraph in pinyin to
 directions ·Reads aloud with appropriate ·Builds on use of verbal phrases to
 express and explain an opinion
 pronunciation, fluency and expression describe actions, e.g. 踢足球、打网
 ·Discusses a topic ·Writes 2 to 3 sentences
 球。
 Reflects on texts read during ·Selects relevant information

 81
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Gives own personal opinion
 independent/pair reading Vocabulary in context
 ·Gives opinions and relates books to ·Explains sensibly ·Words taken from shared or
 own life ·Uses learnt characters if possible. individually read texts

 Records words and their meanings in
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 Uses the writing process with support
 ·Brainstorms ideas
 ·Writes a first draft
 ·Revises
 ·Edits
 ·Writes final draft
 ·Presents neat, legible final draft
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

3-4 Listens to oral descriptions of objects/ Reads information texts e.g. from other Writes a Working with characters
 animals/ plants/ places subjects. description/paragraph/sentences of ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.

 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s Text from the textbook or Teacher’s objects / animals/plants/places in ·Starts to classify the characters with
 pinyin the same radicals.
 Resource File (TRF) Resource File (TRF)
 ·Includes relevant, specific details ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 ·Identifies what it is ·Pre-reading: discusses the topic with
 by radicals.
 ·Describes what it is for support and revises key vocabulary ·Describes physical appearance
 ·Reads a paragraph and identifies main Working with words

 82
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Distinguishes parts from the whole idea and topic sentence ·Uses correct determiners ·Words with the same characters
 ·Draws and label it ·Answers questions on text and visuals ·Uses relevant vocabulary ·Starts to write words in characters if
 e.g. graphs, diagrams, tables learnt.
 ·Uses vocabulary relating to other ·Punctuation is correct
 subjects Reflects on texts read during ·Drafts writing, gets feedback, edits and ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 rewrites of words
 Practises Listening and Speaking independent/pair reading
 ·Summarises what they have read in a ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 (Choose one for daily practice) and high frequency words
 few sentences
 ·Performs a poem Designs, draws and labels visual text .
 Working with sentences
 ·Plays a language game e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps/
 ·Understands and uses the “Subject-
 ·Gives and follows instructions / maps/pictures/graphs/ plans subject-predicate” structure, e.g. 我头
 directions ·Uses information from a written or 疼。
 ·Discusses a topic visual text
 ·Includes specific details Vocabulary in context
 ·Words taken from shared or
 ·Uses key words and phrases
 individually read texts
 ·Uses appropriate vocabulary
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 Records words and their meanings in
 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 Uses the writing process with support
 ·Brainstorms ideas
 ·Writes a first draft

 83
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Revises
 ·Edits
 ·Writes final draft
 ·Presents neat, legible final draft
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 84
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

5-6 Listen to a personal recount of an Reads stories Writes a simple personal letter in Working with characters
 event pinyin ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 (Choose from contemporary realistic
 ·Identifies most important ideas and ·Introduce features of the informal letter ·Starts to classify the characters with
 fiction/traditional stories/personal
 people ·Uses a frame the same radicals.
 accounts/adventure/funny/fantasy/real
 ·Answers questions about what ·Uses an informal style ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 life stories/historical fiction)
 happened first, second, etc, recounting by radicals.
 ·Writes at least two short paragraphs
 the same event Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Uses new vocabulary and punctuation Working with words
 Role-plays some familiar situations Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 learnt ·Words with the same characters.
 ·Uses appropriate language and ·Pre-reading: predicts with support from
 title and pictures ·Uses appropriate grammar, ·Starts to write words in characters if
 actions
 punctuation and spaces between learnt.
 ·Organises content sensibly ·Reads for detail and uses contextual
 paragraphs ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 clues to find meaning
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Uses learnt characters if possible. of words.
 ·Understands the vocabulary
 enrichment ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 ·Answers basic questions on the story Uses the writing process with support
 and high frequency words .
 (Choose one for daily practice) (e.g. message and setting) ·Brainstorms ideas
 ·Performs a poem Practises reading ·Writes first draft Working with sentences

 ·Reads aloud with appropriate ·Understands and uses particle “吧” to
 ·Plays a language game ·Revises
 pronunciation, fluency and expression show suggestions，e.g. 我们走吧。
 ·Tells or retells stories ·Edits
 Reads personal and social texts e.g. a ·Understands and uses “了” to show
 ·Writes final draft
 personal diary or letter changes, e.g. 我感冒了。
 ·Comments on main ideas ·Presents neat, legible final draft
 Vocabulary in context
 ·Reads for detail and notices informal ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Words taken from shared or
 style Records words and their meanings in individually read texts
 ·Comments on format and salutation pinyin in a personal dictionary ·Antonyms (words that are opposite in
 Reflects on texts read during ·Writes sentences using the words or meaning e.g. loud/soft)
 independent/pair reading explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Relates reading to own life 85
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

7-8 Carries out a class survey e.g. Reads information text with visuals Develops a simple questionnaire in Working with characters
 interviews class mates), recording e.g. timetables and television pinyin ·Writes 1-2 characters in context. (if a
 ·Writes questions clearly character is a syllable, what does the
 responses on a chart or graph schedules/charts/tables/ diagrams/mind
 context actually mean?
 ·Asks and answers questions maps/maps/pictures/graphs ·Leaves space for answers
 ·Starts to classify the characters with
 ·Handles interviews politely Text from the textbook or reader/s or ·Uses the question form correctly
 the same radicals.
 ·Records information accurately Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 ·Uses the structure correctly ·Pre-reading: discusses the topic and by radicals.
 Writes a paragraph in pinyin to
 ·Uses key words and phrases revises key vocabulary
 express and explain an opinion Working with words
 ·Reads a paragraph and identifies main
 Sustains a conversation on a familiar ·Writes 3-4 sentences with support ·Words with the same characters
 idea and topic sentence
 topic for enrichment ·Selects relevant information ·Starts to write words in characters if
 ·Answers questions on text and visuals
 ·Listens to and gives other learners a ·Gives own personal opinion learnt.
 ·Scans for specific information
 chance to speak ·Explains sensibly ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Asks and answers questions Does comprehension activity on the of words
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Gives an opinion e.g. Why do you text (oral or written) ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 think…? Uses the writing process with support and high frequency words
 Practises reading
 ·Brainstorms ideas
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate Working with sentences
 pronunciation, fluency and expression ·Writes a first draft ·Understands and uses questions with
 ·Revises “怎么”,e.g. 你怎么去那儿？
 Solves word puzzles for enrichment
 ·Edits ·Builds on understanding and use of the
 ·Uses relevant vocabulary
 ·Writes final draft converbal structures, e.g. 我开车去。
 ·Spells words correctly
 ·Presents neat, legible final draft Vocabulary in context
 ·Explains meanings of words/uses them
 in a sentence ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Words taken from shared or
 Uses a dictionary individually read texts
 Records words and their meanings in

 86
 GRADE 6

 TERM 2

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 Reflects on texts read during pinyin in a personal dictionary
 independent/pair reading ·Writes sentences using the words or
 ·Compares books and texts read explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listens to oral descriptions of Reads a story Writes diary entries in pinyin Working with characters
 places/animals/ plants /objects/etc ·Selects appropriate content for the ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 topic ·Starts to classify the characters with
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Uses the appropriate structure as a the same radicals.
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and
 frame ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 ·Identifies places pictures
 ·Tells the events in the correct order by radicals.
 ·Notes relevant information e.g. on a ·Describes the features of the text
 ·Uses connectors
 chart / table ·Uses reading strategies e.g. uses Working with words

 87
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Identifies similarities and differences contextual clues to determine meaning, ·Uses appropriate grammar, ·Words with the same characters
 makes inferences punctuation and spaces between ·Starts to write words in characters if
 Practises Listening and Speaking for paragraphs
 ·Answers questions about the story learnt.
 enrichment ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Identifies and discusses the setting ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 (Choose one for daily practice) and characters of words
 Uses the writing process with support
 ·Performs a poem ·Describes cause and effect in a story ·Brainstorms ideas ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 ·Plays a language game e.g. What happened when…? Or Why and high frequency words
 ·Writes a first draft
 do you think ... happened?
 ·Gives and follows instructions /
 ·Revises Working with sentences
 directions Reads simple personal letters for
 ·Edits ·Understands and uses the structure
 ·Recounts experiences or events in the enrichment “越来越+adj./mental verb”,e.g.越来越
 right sequence, using connectors ·Writes final draft
 ·Identifies main ideas 高、越来越喜欢汉语。
 ·Presents neat, legible final draft
 ·Answers literal questions ·Use “A 跟B 一样+ verbal phrase”, e.g.
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. 我跟爸爸一样喜欢音乐。
 ·Identifies features of text e.g. date,
 salutation Records words and their meanings in Vocabulary in context
 a personal dictionary ·Words taken from shared or
 ·Writes sentences using the words or individually read texts
 explanations to show the meaning, etc

 ·Uses learnt characters if possible

3-4 Listens to a simple talk on an issue Reads information texts with visuals Writes information text using visuals Working with characters
 ·Asks and answers simple questions e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps/ e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/ mind maps/ ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Discusses the main idea maps/pictures/graphs. maps/ pictures/graphs Text from the ·Starts to classify the characters with
 ·Gives opinions textbook or reader/s or Teacher’s the same radicals.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Respects other learners by listening to Resource File (TRF) ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)

 88
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 them ·Pre-reading: scans for important ·Reads selected text by radicals.
 details ·Uses information from the text to draw
 ·Talks about an issue after preparation Working with words
 ·Asks questions and label visual text e.g. tables or
 ·Selects appropriate topic and content ·Words with the same characters
 ·Selects relevant details to answer charts or graphs
 ·Stays on topic ·Starts to write words in characters if
 questions ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Organises content logically learnt.
 ·Makes a mind map summary of the
 Transfers text into graphic form e.g. ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 text/selection of the text
 uses notes of information collected of words
 Does comprehension activity on the ·Transfers information into graphic form ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 text (oral or written) e.g. a graph or table and high frequency words
 ·Analyses information Working with sentences
 Practises reading
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Understands and uses the structure
 pronunciation, fluency and expression “要……了”，e.g.音乐会要开始了。
 Writes a short report in pinyin in a
 ·Builds on use of the adverb “都”, e.g.
 frame on information collected
 我们都喜欢音乐。
 ·Evaluates with support the information
 Uses an appropriate structure for the Vocabulary in context
 report ·Words taken from shared or
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. individually read texts

5-6 Listens to a song/simple poems Reads poems or songs Writes a simple passage / paragraph Working with characters
 ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and in pinyin using the writing process ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s
 pictures
 Resource File (TRF) with support ·Starts to classify the characters with
 ·Uses reading strategies e.g. uses ·Selects interesting content the same radicals.
 ·Recalls main idea
 contextual clues
 ·Discusses central idea ·Uses the story structure as a frame ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 ·Answers questions about the poem

 89
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Relates to own experience ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the ·Uses a beginning, middle and end by radicals.
 ·Identifies rhyme poem ·Tells events in appropriate order Working with words
 ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the ·Discusses rhyme ·Uses punctuation correctly ·Words with the same characters
 poem ·Discusses comparisons made in the ·Uses appropriate spacing for ·Starts to write words in characters if
 ·Performs song/selected lines poem paragraphs learnt.
 Practises reading ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 Practises Listening and Speaking
 ·Reads aloud with expression, showing of words
 (Choose one for daily practice) Uses the writing process with support
 understanding
 ·Performs a poem ·Brainstorms ideas using e.g. mind ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 ·Reads aloud using proper and high frequency words
 maps
 ·Plays a language game pronunciation, pacing and volume.
 ·Writes first draft Working with sentences
 ·Gives and follows instructions /
 Reflects on texts read during ·Gets feedback on content and use of
 directions ·Builds on understanding and use of
 independent/pair reading grammar and vocabulary questions with “怎么”, e.g.我们怎么去
 ·Discusses a topic
 ·Relates texts to own life ·Writes final draft 约堡？
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Builds on use of the converbal
 strucuture, e.g. 我们坐火车去。
 For enrichment:
 Vocabulary in context
 Writes for fun e.g. simple four line poem
 ·Words taken from shared or
 or rhyming sentences
 individually read texts
 ·Chooses topic
 ·Writes rhyming sentences on topic
 ·Uses one comparison
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 Records words and their meanings in

 90
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Writes sentences using the words or
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.

 ·Uses learnt characters if possible

7-8 Listens to and carries out instructions Reads procedural text e.g. Makes a mind map / summary of a Working with characters
 e.g. a procedure recipe/instructions (e.g. folding a paper short text with a frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Predicts what might come next box) ·Identifies at least three main points ·Starts to classify the characters with
 ·Discusses specific details of text ·Organises information neatly the same radicals.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 ·Discusses sequence of instructions ·Uses appropriate symbols ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 /diagrams/other relevant graphic text by radicals.
 ·Discusses the form of the verb used in ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and
 headings Interprets visuals ·Uses appropriate vocabulary Working with words
 Practises Listening and Speaking for
 ·Answers questions about the text ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Words with the same characters
 enrichment
 ·Discusses what needs to be done of words ·Starts to write words in characters if
 (Choose one for daily practice) learnt.
 ·Discusses sequence of instructions
 ·Performs a poem Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Follows the instructions
 ·Plays a language game Uses the writing process with support of words
 ·Gives and follows instructions / Reflects on texts read during ·Brainstorms ideas using e.g. mind ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 directions independent/pair reading maps and high frequency words
 ·Discusses a topic ·Describes features of some of texts ·Writes first draft
 Working with sentences
 read ·Checks spelling
 ·Builds on the use of directional
 ·Writes final draft words,e.g.前、前边、前面。
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Uses “在+directional words”, e.g. 汽车

 91
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 站在左边。
 Records words and their meanings in
 pinyin in a personal dictionary ·Understands and uses “往+directional

 ·Writes sentences using the words or words+verb”, e.g. 往前走。
 explanations to show the meaning, etc. Vocabulary in context
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Words taken from shared or
 individually read texts

9-10 Participates in conversation on a Reads a role play Writes a short dialogue in pinyin, using Working with characters
 familiar topic ( e.g. The Weather) a more informal style of writing (in a ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) frame) ·Starts to classify the characters with
 ·Selects appropriate characters the same radicals.
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) ·Pre-reading predicting from title
 ·Develops the conversation and action ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 ·Asks relevant questions and responds ·Uses reading strategies
 logically by radicals.
 to questions ·Identifies the story-line
 ·Sustains the conversation ·Uses direct speech Working with words
 ·Discusses characters, setting and
 ·Expresses opinions ·Uses appropriate punctuation e.g. ·Words with the same characters
 action
 colon, exclamation and question marks ·Starts to write words in characters if
 ·Respects others’ ideas ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the
 text ·Uses learnt characters if possible. learnt.
 ·Encourages other learners to speak
 the additional language ·Discusses features of the text Uses writing process with support ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 especially punctuation and format ·Brainstorms ideas using mind maps of words
 Performs simple role plays
 ·Produces first draft ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 ·Uses appropriate content and Does comprehension activity on the
 and high frequency words
 language text (oral or written) ·Gets feedback and revises
 Working with sentences

 92
 GRADE 6

 TERM 3

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Uses direct speech ·Proofreads ·Understands and uses particle “过”,e.g
 Practises reading
 ·Develops sensible story line ·Writes final draft 我去过上海。
 ·Reads aloud with expression, showing
 ·Uses voice and expression and understanding of the text ·Presents neat, legible final draft with Vocabulary in context
 gestures to convey meaning ·Reads aloud using proper correct spacing ·Words taken from shared or
 ·Pronounces words audibly and pronunciation, pacing and volume. ·Uses learnt characters if possible. individually read texts
 correctly
 Reflects on texts read during Records words and their meanings in
 independent/pair reading pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Presents a short oral book report with ·Writes sentences using the words or
 appropriate content and structure explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Gives own opinion ·Uses learnt characters if possible

 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

1-2 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a simple story / passage in Working with characters
 pinyin ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 (Choose from contemporary realistic Text from the textbook or reader/s or

 93
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Uses story structure as a frame ·Starts to classify the characters with
 fiction/traditional stories/personal Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Uses language imaginatively the same radicals.
 accounts/adventure/funny/fantasy/real ·Pre-reading: predicts from the title and
 pictures especially a variety of vocabulary ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 life stories/historical fiction)
 ·Links sentences into a coherent by radicals.
 ·Uses reading strategies: uses
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or paragraph using pronouns, connectors
 contextual clues to find the meaning of Working with words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) new words and correct punctuation
 ·Words with the same characters
 ·Asks relevant questions and responds ·Discusses plot, setting and characters ·Uses appropriate grammar, spelling
 ·Starts to write words in characters if
 to questions and punctuation
 ·Discusses the sequence of events, learnt.
 ·Answers simple and begins to ask and ·Uses correct tense consistently
 answering questions about what ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 answer more complex questions e.g. happened first, second, etc
 Why couldn’t … ?; What…? How do ·Uses the dictionary to check spelling of words
 ·Asks and answers more complex ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 you think …? and meanings of words
 questions e.g. Why couldn’t … ?; and high frequency words
 Practises Listening and Speaking for What…? How do you think …? ·Uses learnt characters if possible
 enrichment Working with sentences
 Does comprehension activity on the Uses the writing process with support
 ·Understands and uses “A跟B一起”,e.g
 (Choose one for daily practice) text (oral or written) ·Brainstorms ideas
 我跟妈妈一起去。
 ·Performs a poem ·Writes first draft
 Reads personal letters (for ·Understands and uses “……极了”,e.g.
 ·Plays a language game ·Revises
 enrichments) 好极了。
 ·Gives and follows instructions/ ·Pre-reading: predicts based on ·Edits
 directions Vocabulary in context
 skimming the text ·Writes final draft
 ·Discusses a topic ·Words taken from shared or
 ·Uses reading strategies: uses ·Presents neat, legible final draft individually read texts
 contextual clues to find the meaning of
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 new words
 ·Identifies main idea and specific details Records words and their meanings in

 ·Discusses the purpose of the letter pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Writes sentences using the words or

 94
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Discusses the format of the letter explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 Practises reading
 ·Reads aloud with expression, showing
 understanding
 ·Reads aloud using proper
 pronunciation, pacing and volume

3-4 Listens to and discusses a talk Reads information text Text from the Uses information from a visual text Working with characters
 ·Discusses main ideas and specific textbook or reader/s or Teacher’s e.g. charts/tables/ diagrams/mind maps/ ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 details ·Starts to classify the characters with
 Resource File (TRF) maps/
 ·Records specific information on a chart ·Pre-reading: reads and discusses the same radicals.
 pictures/ graphs to write a text
 or mind map headings and pictures ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 ·Writes two to three paragraphs
 Practises Listening and Speaking for ·Notices the role that pictures and by radicals.
 ·Punctuation are correct
 photographs play in constructing
 enrichment Working with words
 meaning ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 (Choose one for daily practice) ·Words with the same characters
 ·Answers questions about the text Writes visual information text
 ·Performs a poem ·Starts to write words in characters if
 ·Summarises a paragraph with support ·Makes a mind map summary of a short learnt.
 ·Plays a language game
 text with support
 Does comprehension activity on the ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Gives and follows instructions/ ·Organises advantages and
 text (oral or written) of words
 directions disadvantages into a table
 ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 ·Discusses a topic Practises reading
 ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings and high frequency words
 ·Reads aloud with appropriate
 pronunciation, fluency and expression of words Working with sentences
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Understands and uses “A比B+adj.+得
 Reflects on texts read during
 Records words and their meanings in 多”,e.g 他比我高得多。

 95
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 ·Understands and uses “adj.+ 得不得
 independent/pair reading pinyin in a personal dictionary
 了”,e.g. 好得不得了。
 ·Expresses emotional response to texts ·Writes sentences using the words or
 read explanations to show the meaning, etc. Vocabulary in context
 ·Relates text to own life ·Uses learnt characters if possible.. ·Words taken from shared or
 individually read texts

5-6 Listens to a story Reads a story Writes a book review in pinyin Working with characters
 ·Selects appropriate content and ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 (Choose from fiction/traditional Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 structure ·Starts to classify the characters with
 stories/personal accounts/adventure/ Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 ·Expresses and explains own opinion the same radicals.
 funny/fantasy/real life stories/historical ·Pre-reading: predicts from the title and
 pictures ·Includes title, characters and summary ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries
 fiction)
 by radicals.
 ·Uses reading strategies: uses ·Writes a personal letter
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or
 contextual clues to find the meaning of ·Selects appropriate content Working with words
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF) new words
 ·Uses a frame only if necessary ·Words with the same characters
 ·Asks relevant questions and responds ·Discusses plot, setting and characters
 to questions ·Addresses the message correctly ·Starts to write words in characters if
 ·Discusses the sequence of events, learnt.
 ·Summarises the story ·Orders the information logically
 answering questions about what ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 ·Answers and begins to ask and happened first, second, etc ·Writes own name at the end
 of words
 answer more complex questions e.g. ·Asks and answers more complex ·Uses an informal style of writing ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 Why couldn’t … ?; What…? How do questions e.g. Why couldn’t … ?; appropriate for the purpose and high frequency words
 you think …? What…? How do you think …?
 ·Expresses an opinion, giving a reason Uses the writing process Working with sentences
 ·Expresses and explains own opinion
 for it e.g. on ethical, social and critical ·Brainstorms ideas ·Builds on the use of affirmative-
 issues in a story, code switching if Does comprehension activity on the ·Writes a first draft negative questions, e.g 你喝不喝水？

 96
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 necessary ·Revises ·Understands and uses “除了……
 text (oral or written)
 Uses tenses introduced in the earlier ·Edits 还……”,e.g.除了饺子，我还喜欢馄饨。
 grades e.g. simple past and future Reads poems
 ·Pre-reading: predicts from title and ·Writes final draft Vocabulary in context
 Listens to a poem/s pictures ·Presents neat, legible final draft ·Words taken from shared or
 Text from the textbook or Teacher’s ·Uses reading strategies e.g. uses individually read texts
 ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 Resource File (TRF) contextual clues
 of words
 ·Recalls main idea ·Answers questions about the poem
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Discusses central idea ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the
 poem Records words and their meanings in
 ·Relates to own experience
 ·Discusses rhyme and alliteration pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Identifies rhyme and words that begin
 ·Writes sentences using the words or
 with the same sounds (alliteration) ·Discusses comparisons made in the
 explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 ·Identifies and discusses comparisons poem (similes)
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 (e.g. similes) Practises reading
 ·Expresses feelings stimulated by the ·Reads aloud with expression, showing
 poem understanding
 ·Performs song/selected lines ·Reads aloud using proper
 pronunciation, pacing and volume

5-6 Practises Listening and Speaking Reflects on texts read during

 (Choose one for daily practice) independent/pair reading
 ·Performs a poem ·Does a structured book review with
 good oral presentation
 ·Plays a language game
 ·Gives and follows instructions/

 97
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 directions
 ·Discusses a topic
 ·Recounts events or experiences in the
 right sequence, answering questions
 about what happened first, second,
 third, etc

7-8 Takes part in a conversation (e. g. Reads media texts e.g. magazine Writes a simple paragraph/passage in Working with characters
 Role models) article/news report. pinyin using a frame ·Writes 1-2 characters in context.
 ·Asks and answers questions ·Includes relevant information
 Text from the textbook or reader/s or ·Starts to classify the characters with
 ·Respects other learners ·Includes a clear main idea
 Teacher’s Resource File (TRF)
 the same radicals.
 ·Listens to other learners and ·Pre-reading: predicts what text is about ·Develops information logically
 encourages them to speak by previewing it ·Uses connectors and organises ·Learns to look up words in dictionaries

 Participates in discussion ·Uses a range of reading strategies e.g. paragraphs properly by radicals.
 ·Imagines and describes possibilities skimming, scanning ·Uses the correct format Working with words
 ·Uses the conditional ·Answers questions ·Uses appropriate grammar, ·Words with the same characters
 ·Takes turns ·Discusses main ideas and specific vocabulary, punctuation
 ·Stars to write words in characters if
 ·Respects others’ opinions
 details ·Uses learnt characters if possible. learnt.
 ·Discusses the layout and design of the
 ·Encourages others to speak Designs a poster for enrichment ·Uses the dictionary to check meanings
 text
 ·Includes relevant information of words
 Practises Listening and Speaking ·Compares layout and design to that of
 ·Includes a picture ·Builds on knowledge of sight words
 (Choose one for daily practice) newspaper
 ·Uses the correct format and high frequency words
 ·Performs a poem Does comprehension activity on the
 ·Uses design features such as colour Working with sentences
 ·Plays a language game text (oral or written) and different sizes or kinds of print ·Understands and uses rhetorical
 ·Gives and follows
 ·Practises reading (font)

 98
 GRADE 6

 TERM 4

Weeks Listening and Speaking (ORAL) Reading and viewing Writing and Presenting Language Structures and Conventions

 instructions/directions ·Reads aloud with appropriate ·Presents neat, legible, final draft questions, e.g.你不喝可乐吗？
 ·Discusses a topic pronunciation, fluency and expression ·Uses learnt characters if possible. ·Review comparatives.
 Reads and understands graphic
 Uses the writing process with support Vocabulary in context
 media text e.g. posters and ·Writes first draft ·Words taken from shared or
 advertisements ·Revises individually read texts
 ·Pre-reading: discusses pictures
 ·Proofreads
 ·Interprets the information
 ·Writes final draft
 ·Discusses the purpose of the text
 ·Presents neat, legible final draft
 ·Discusses some of the language use
 ·Uses learnt characters if possible.
 ·Identifies and discusses design
 features such as colour and different Records words and their meanings in
 sizes or kinds of print (font) pinyin in a personal dictionary
 ·Discusses the layout ·Writes sentences using the words or
 ·Compares different texts e.g. posters explanations to show the meaning, etc.
 and advertisements ·Uses learnt characters if possible.

 Reflects on texts read during
 independent/pair reading
 ·Shares opinions on texts

9-10 FORMAL ASSESSMENT

 99
 SECTION 4
ASSESSMENT IN THE SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE

4.1 INTRODUCTION
Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the
performance of learners, using various forms of assessment. It involves four steps: generating and collecting evidence
of achievement; evaluating this evidence; recording the findings and using this information to understand and thereby
assist the learner’s development in order to improve the process of learning and teaching.

Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning). In both cases
regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance the learning experience.

The Second Additional Language learners’ success depends on regular, informal assessment and feedback from the
teacher as they engage with the texts and activities. The teaching plan sets out the required content, skills and
strategies for teaching and learning over a year. This is what will be assessed at increasing levels of development
(progression). Not everything taught needs to be formally assessed. However, it is essential that learners’ progress is
assessed through both a formal and an informal assessment programme, as this informs planning.

Learners’ listening skills, oral competence, ability to answer questions, participation in discussions and written
recording skills where necessary should be observed on a daily basis.

It is important, too, that learners’ understandingof what they are reading is assessed and not just their ability to
recognise or decode words. Assessment of reading should therefore also take place regularly and not just be a once-
off assessment. Formal reading assessment should focus on reading aloud as well as activities which help a teacher
to determine how much the learner has understood, for example, retelling a story or answering questions.

Assessment of written work will focus primarily on the learner’s ability to convey meaning, as well as how correctly
they have written, for example, correct Language Structures and Conventions, spelling and punctuation. All
assessment should recognise that language learning is a process and that learners will not produce a completely
correct piece of work the first time round. Therefore the various stages in the writing process should also be
introduced.

When giving a formal assessment task, there will be a focus on a particular skill, for example Listening and Speaking,
or Reading or Writing. However, because language learning is an integrated process, more than one skill will be used.
The language structures should be assessed in context. It must be ensured that assessment is not only done as
written work, but allows for practical and oral work too. It is important to assess what learners understand and not
what they can just memorise, so assess skills in context as much as possible e.g. learners may spell all their words
correctly during a test on Friday, but are they able to use those same words correctly spelt when writing/ recording
their personal news or a story?

Teaching and assessment of languages should make provision for inclusion of all learners, and strategies should be
found to assist all learners to access or produce language texts. Some students experiencing barriers may not be able
to attain some of the aims as they are presented in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement.

4.2 INFORMAL OR DAILY ASSESSMENT
Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on a learner’s achievement that can be
used to improve their learning.

 100
 Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations, discussions,
practical demonstrations, learner-teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, etc. Informal assessment may
be as simple as stopping during the lesson to observe learners or to discuss with learners how learning is progressing.
Assessment of language competence will be in the form of observation, written exercises, oral activities and
presentations, written tests, reading aloud and other forms of assessment. Informal assessment should be used to
provide feedback to the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but need not be recorded. It should not be seen
as separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom. Many of the learning activities may be used to
assess learners’ performance informally. In some cases, teachers might want to set specific assessment types of
activities to motivate learners to learn, such as regular spelling texts. Learners or teachers can mark these
assessment tasks.

It is suggested that teachers use the first two weeks of the term to do a baseline assessment of learners. Use the
activities given in the first two weeks of the teaching plans to do this assessment. This will enable teachers to
establish the kind of attention that learners will need as they proceed.

Self assessment and peer assessment actively involves learners in assessment. This is important as it allows learners
to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily assessment tasks are not formally
recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. Teachers may however wish to keep their own informal records of how
individual learners are progressing in the different aspects of the subject to assist with planning and ensuring that
individual learners develop the required skills and understanding. The results of daily assessment tasks are not taken
into account for promotion and certification purposes.

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT
All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as Formal
Assessment. Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and
certification purposes. All Formal Assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance
and to ensure that appropriate standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a
grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, oral presentations,
demonstrations (such as retelling a story, matching), performances (such as role play), paragraphs/passages
participation in oral tasks (such as dialogues, conversations, discussions), written tasks (such as completing a
worksheet, writing paragraphs or other types of texts), etc. Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal
Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject. While preparations for formal assessment tasks could be done
outside the classroom, the final version should be done under controlled conditions, in the classroom.

Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject.

Formal assessment tasks must assess not only learners’ knowledge and skill but also their use of the language in
context.

In formal assessment, use memoranda, rubrics, checklists and rating scales as well as other appropriate assessment
tools to observe, assess and record learners’ levels of understanding and skill. Choose an assessment tool that is
most appropriate for the type of activity. For example, a rubric is more suitable than a memorandum for a creative
writing piece. A memorandum is better suited to a spelling test or a reading comprehension activity.

The formal assessment requirements for Second Additional Language are as follows:

One formal assessment tasks for the first and third terms must be completed and one in the fourth term, totalling five
 in all for the school year. These five formal assessment tasks make up 75% of the total mark for Second
 Additional Language in Grades 4, 5 and 6. This formal assessment mark will include the mid-year test or
 101
 examination, if this is given.

The first formal assessment task in each term should be done in the middle of the term. The mid-year test formal
 assessment task in term 2 should be done towards the end of the term.

There will be an examination at the year-end which will count for 25% of the mark.

Each formal assessment task should be made up of activities that assess Listening and Speaking, Reading, Writing,
 and Language Structures and Conventions, and should take place over a period of days. Language Structures
 and Conventions should be assessed in context.

Formal assessment tasks must assess a range of aspects of the language skills so that key aspects will be assessed
 over the course of the term and the year. Ensure that these aspects have been informally assessed and
 feedback given to the learner before they are formally assessed.

All assessment in the Intermediate Phase is internal.

The forms of assessment used should be age and developmental level appropriate. The design of these tasks should
cover the content of the subject and include a variety of tasks designed to achieve the objectives of the subject.

Formal assessment tasks

Each formal assessment task should cover the following aspects and have the following weighting. It should be based
on the knowledge and skills done during that term. The examples given below are merely to illustrate the kind of
activity that should be set. Use the term plans for each grade to select the kind of activities and the set of skills
required for each part of the formal assessment task.

Requirements for the compilation of a task are given in percentages. Where thirty percent for a language skill is
indicated, it means that the final allocation of marks for that language skill should be thirty percent of the total and not
thirty marks. Schools are not limited to a number of marks allocated to a language skill as long as the weighting for
each language skill is observed for each task according to the percentage allocated. In grade four for example, a
language knowledge test may be set for ten marks or more, as long as the final weighting does not exceed the
weighting indicated.

In Writing parts of the planning process or the whole process should be assessed at least once per term. The lengths
of texts for writing as indicated in Section 3.4 should be strictly adhered to.

 Composition of a formal assessment task (FAT) Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 Listening and Speaking 40 % 40 % 40 %

 Listening An activity to show that the learner has listened and 20 % 20 % 20 %
 understood e.g. listen and follow instructions/listen to a
 text and answer questions about it, orally or in writing

 Speaking An activity to show that the learner can express 20 % 20 % 20 %
 him/herself orally e.g. take part in a conversation or
 dialogue/discuss a topic or text/give instructions or
 directions/perform a poem/give a short talk

 OR

 102
 One or more combined Listening and Speaking 40% 40% 40%
 activities to demonstrate ability to understand and
 express oral language e.g. listen to and retell a
 story/listen to a talk and discuss it

 Reading 30% 30% 30%%

Reading aloud An activity to show that the learner can read fluently 10% 10% 10%
 e.g. read aloud from a familiar text (Terms 1 to 4)/read
 aloud from an unfamiliar text (Terms 3 and 4). This
 must include a few questions to determine whether the
 learner has understood what has been read.

Reading Two or more activities to show that the learner can 20% 20% 20%
comprehension understand the meaning of the text and recognises
 features of the text e.g. answer questions/retell a
 story/make up own ending/give a summary/give own
 opinion/describe features of the text. Texts used may
 be short extracts or extended reading texts read during
 independent reading. The activity must suit the type of
 text chosen.

 Writing 20% 20% 20%

Creative writing One activity to show the learner can express ideas 10% 10% 10%
 creatively in writing e.g. writes a particular creative text
 type (or a short paragraph/passage) or part of it or
 sentences. The activity must show use of language
 structures in context.

Informational/ One activity to show the learner can give information in 10% 10% 10%
Transactional writing writing e.g. writes a particular social or functional text
 type (such as a report/poster/ labelling
 diagrams/sentences/simple dialogues) or part of it.
 The activity must show use of language structures in
 context.

Language structure 10% 10% 10%
and conventions

Formal language One or more activities to show learner has knowledge 10% 10% 10%
usage of language structures and their use e.g. correct
 punctuation/ spelling/appropriate use of parts of
 speech and sentence structures

 103
 Total percentage for 100% 100% 100%
 each task

4.4 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT
The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout
a term. A programme for assessment must be drawn up by the school indicating the dates on which tasks will be
done.

4.4.1 Overview of requirements

The following table provides an overview of the Programme of Assessment requirements for each term for Second
Additional Languages:

Table 4.1: Grades 4 - 6

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4

 FAT 3 / Mid-year
 Grade 4 FAT 1 FAT 2 FAT 4 FAT 5 End-of-year examination
 examination

 FAT 3 / Mid-year
 Grade 5 FAT 1 FAT 2 FAT 4 FAT 5 End-of-year examination
 examination

 FAT 3 / Mid-year
 Grade 6 FAT 1 FAT 2 FAT 4 FAT 5 End-of-year examination
 examination

 Composition End-of-year examination
 Continuous assessment 75%
 of final mark 25%

4.4.2 Examinations

Content for the end-of-year examination should be drawn from the work done for the year and should be a selection of
skills and activities that will enable the learner to show that he/she is ready to engage with the work in the next year.

The examination will consist of the following:

Reading comprehension, including vocabulary work

Writing of a short creative text, including appropriate and correct usage of format, grammar, punctuation and spelling

Writing of a short transactional text, including appropriate and correct usage of format, grammar, punctuation and
 spelling

Knowledge and understanding of grammar, punctuation and spelling

 104
 Listening and Speaking skills will not be assessed as part of the examination as these are best assessed over a
 longer period of time.

The weighting of marks for the examination is as follows:

 Grade 4 Grade 5 Grade 6

 Reading Comprehension 60% 60% 50%

 Writing 25% 25% 35%

 Language Structures and Conventions 15% 15% 15%

 Total percentage 100% 100% 100%

4.5 RECORDING AND REPORTING
Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific
assessment task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in
the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence
of the learner’s conceptual progression within a grade and her / his readiness to progress or being promoted
to the next grade. Records of learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by
teachers and learners in the teaching and learning process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other stakeholders.
Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’ meetings, school
visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters, etc. Teachers in all
grades report in percentages against the subject. Seven levels of competence have been described for each subject
listed for Grades R - 12. The various achievement levels and their corresponding percentage bands are as shown in
the Table below.

CODES AND PERCENTAGES FOR RECORDING AND REPORTING

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE

 7 Outstanding achievement 80 - 100

 6 Meritorious achievement 70 - 79

 5 Substantial achievement 60 - 69

 4 Adequate achievement 50 - 59

 105
 3 Moderate achievement 40 - 49

 2 Elementary achievement 30 - 39

 1 Not achieved 0 - 29

Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages against the
subject on the learners’ report cards.

4.6 MODERATION OF ASSESSMENT
Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should
be implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation
practices must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

Moderators at school level must give quality comments to ensure that the assessment practice at school is enhanced.
Moderation cannot simply be a monitoring exercise to check that the correct number of tasks has been done or that a
memorandum has been applied correctly. In Languages it means that the moderator will give good comment, among
other things, on the levels of questioning in comprehension testing; the frequency of extended writing; the quality of
assessment instruments and the developmental opportunities afforded, and the teacher’s engagement with learner
workbooks and evidence of learner performance.

The moderation process must also ensure that the ratings given are consistent across all classes in the grade, and all
grades in the phase. For example, a rating of 3 given by one teacher should represent the same level of skill and
knowledge as the same rating given by another teacher. It is therefore important for Subject Heads to do internal
moderation regularly.

4.7 GENERAL
This document should be read in conjunction with:

4.7.1 The National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement, Grades R - 12; and

4.7.2 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R - 12.

GLOSSARY
acronym - a word made up from the first letters of the name of something, e.g. CAPS is an acronym for Curriculum
and Assessment Policy Statement

aesthetic - the use of language to create something artistic, fine and beautiful

alliteration-the use of several words together that begin with the same sound or letter, e.g. Round the rocks the
ragged rascal ran

allusion - writing or speaking that mentions a subject, person, etc. indirectly, e.g. He alluded to the president’s ill
health

 106
 ambiguity - a possible double meaning which may make a message unclear when used by mistake, e.g. I am going
out for the present may mean I am leaving for this time OR I am going to get a gift

anecdote - a short story of based on personal experience

anti-climax - a situation or event that is less exciting because it happens after something that was much better. In
literature study anti-climax suggests that the expectations built up by the writer are deliberately disappointed.

antonym - a word that is opposite in meaning to another word in the same language, e.g. tall and short are antonyms
in Mandarin

appreciation - pleasure you express when you realise something is good, useful, or well done; an understanding of
the importance or meaning of something

appropriate - correct or suitable for a particular time, situation, or purpose

assonance - repetition of vowel sounds in two or more words, e.g. All is in tune in the world in June

assumptions - something that you think is true although you have no definite proof. Underlying assumption --a
belief that is used as the basis for an idea, but which may not be correct

bias - an opinion about whether something is good or bad which influences how you deal with it

chronological - arranged according to when things happened or were made, e.g. The poems were arranged in
chronological order.

clip (video clip/audio clip) - a short part of a film, television or radio programme that is shown by itself, especially as
an advertisement, e.g. clips from the new James Bond film

cognitive academic skills - these are skills such as inferencing, synthesising and evaluating; the term cognitive
academic language proficiency (CALP) was coined by Jim Cummins to describe abstract, decontextualised,
cognitively demanding language i.e. the kind of language that you would find in a science textbook

coherent - something which makes logical sense; a coherent paragraph has a clear development of ideas and
sentences have logical links

cohesive - a cohesive text is one which flows and has unity. It makes use of connectives, conjunctions and pronouns,
which hold the text together, e.g. Punctuation is important makes written language easier to understand.

colloquial - language or words that are used mainly in informal conversations rather than in writing or formal speech,
e.g. just chuck it there (colloquial) instead of please place it there (formal)

conjunctive - in conjunctive writing systems (e.g. isiZulu and isiXhosa) there are spaces between grammatical words
rather than morphemes; words are therefore longer than in disjunctive writing systems (e.g. Sesotho and Setswana)

connotation - the meanings which a word suggests, e.g. plump has positive connotations such as attractive,
comfortable, cheerful; whereas fat has more negative connotations

climax - the most exciting, effective or important part of a story, which usually comes near the end

conflict - struggle that arises between characters, between characters and their circumstances or from opposing
desires or values

critical language awareness - the analysis of how meaning is constructed by those in power to maintain their
position; the analysis of language forms to reveal the mechanics of power-based relationships. It empowers the
learner to resist manipulation and to use language sensitively

critique - a detailed explanation or evaluation of something such as political beliefs

 107
 decoding - to discover the meaning of a word or message

decontextualised - taken out of the situation, events, or information related to it

denotation - the literal or straightforward meaning of a word

denouement- the exciting last part of a story or play

disjunctive - in disjunctive writing systems (e.g. Sesotho and Setswana) there are spaces between morphemes;
words are therefore shorter than in conjunctive writing systems (e.g. isiZulu and isiXhosa)

dramatic irony - when the people watching a play know something that the characters do not, and can understand
the real importance or meaning of what is happening

element - one part or feature of a whole system, plan, piece of work etc., especially one that is basic or important

emotive - emotive language is language which arouses strong feelings

euphemism - a polite word or expression that you use instead of a more direct one to avoid shocking or upsetting
someone, e.g. Pass away is a euphemism for die

evocative - making people remember something by producing a feeling or memory in them

explicit - clearly or directly stated (as opposed to implicit)

exposure - given the chance to experience new ideas, ways of life, cultures etc.

falling action - refers to events that happen after the climax, where the tension has been released and the story
moves towards its end. This is also known as the denouement

generic - relating to a whole group of things rather than to one thing

genre - a genre is a particular kind of text written with a specific purpose and audience in mind; it has a recognisable
structure and language features. Examples are: novel, drama, poetry, short stories, film, diaries, journals, academic
articles, comics, etc.

homograph - a word that is spelled the same as another, but is different in meaning, origin, grammar, or
pronunciation, e.g. the noun record is a homograph of the verb record

homonym - a word which has both the same sound and spelling as another word but a different meaning, e.g. the
noun bear and the verb to bear

homophone - a word which sounds the same as another but is spelled differently and has a different meaning, e.g.
one and won

hyperbole- an exaggeration, e.g. to describe something so that it appears bigger than it really is, for example, He
gave me a mountainous plate of food.

icon - a small sign or picture on a page or computer screen that is used to indicate or start a particular operation or
activity, e.g. To open a new file, click on the icon.

impact - the effect or influence that an event, situation etc. has on someone or something

implied- meaning that is suggested but not directly stated, e.g. “It’s ten o’clock” may imply that the other is late

infer - to read between the lines to form an opinion about something

inference - something that you think is true based on the information you have

inflection- the way your voice goes up and down when you are speaking to communicate meaning

inhibition - a feeling of shyness or embarrassment that stops you doing or saying what you really want

 108
 interpersonal communication skills - this is face-to-face language where the context helps speakers to make
interpret meaning; Jim Cummins coined the term Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS)

intonation - a pattern of rise and fall in the pitch of one’s voice which contributes to the meaning of sentences, e.g.
questions are spoken with a rising intonation

irony - something which is the opposite of what is expected; using words to mean the opposite of what is expected

key word searches - these can be carried out when the text is on the internet or in the computer’s memory. The
programme can be asked to search for specific words or phrases

manipulative - clever at controlling or deceiving people to get what you want.

Manipulative language is aimed at getting an influence or unfair advantage over others, e.g. in advertising or political
speeches

- a language (or terminology) used to talk about language, e.g. irony, hyperbole, alliteration

metre - the arrangement of sounds in poetry into patterns of strong and weak beats. It creates rhythm

mode - a method, way or manner in which something is presented; a way of communicating (e.g. the written mode,
the spoken or oral mode, the visual mode (which includes graphic forms such as charts); information can be changed
from one mode to another (e.g. by converting a graph into a passage). There are different modes of communication:
the written mode, the spoken or oral mode, the visual mode, the kinetic mode which makes use of gestures; some
texts combine these modes and are therefore called multimodaltexts

modulation - to change the sound of your voice

monitor - to watch and check a situation carefully in order to see how it changes over a period of time

motion --a proposal that is made formally at a meeting which is then usually decided on by voting, e.g. The motion
was defeated by 201 votes to 159.

multimodal - multimodal texts are designed to make use of more than one mode of communication, e.g. sound, print,
images and gestures

onomatopoeia - words which sound like what they describe, e.g. a brush swishes, a cow moos

pace - the speed at which something happens or is done

perspective --a way of thinking about something, especially a way of thinking which is influenced by the type of
person you are or by your experiences

point of view - a particular way of thinking about or judging a situation, e.g. From an economic point of view, the new
development will benefit the town greatly. Also someone’s personal opinion or attitude about something, e.g. I respect
your point of view, but I’m not sure I agree with you.

posture - the way you position your body when sitting or standing

pull down menus - a list of things a computer program can do. You make a pull-down menu appear on the computer
screen by clicking on a special word or icon.

pun- a play on words, e.g. Seven days without water makes a person weak.

radical - A radical, or component of a character, usually indicates its meaning

rapport - friendly agreement and understanding between people, a cooperative relationship

reflect - to think carefully about something, or to say something that you have been thinking about

refrain - part of a song or poem that is repeated, especially at the end of each verse
 109
 register- the words, style and grammar used by speaker and writers in different contexts or situations, e.g. official
documents are written in a bureaucratic register, legal documents are written in a legal register

resolution - when a problem or difficult situation in a story, play or novel is solved

rhetorical question - a question that is asked for emphasis or dramatic effect rather than to get an answer, e.g. Do
you know how lucky you are?

rhythm - a regular and repeated pattern of sounds, e.g. of strongly and weakly stressed syllables

rising action - in the early part of a play, novel, story or film one or more conflicts are developed. Because of the
increased sense of conflict the action is said to be ‘rising’ towards a climax.

sarcasm- speaking or writing using expressions which clearly mean the opposite of what is felt in order to be unkind
of offensive in an amusing way, e.g. saying to someone who has arrived at a meeting very late, So good of you to
come.

scan - to run one’s eyes over a text in order to find specific information, e.g. you scan a telephone directory for a
name and number, or a timetable for the time of a train or bus

skim - to read a text very quickly to get an overview, e.g. skim the newspaper headlines for the main news

stage direction - a written instruction to an actor to do something in a play

stereotype - a fixed (and often biased) view about what a particular type of person (e.g. a woman, a foreigner, a
particular race group) is like

strategies - a planned series of actions for achieving something

symbol- something which stands for or represents something else, e.g. a dove is a symbol of peace

synonym - a word which has the same meaning or nearly the same meaning as another word in the same language,
e.g. big and large are synonyms in Mandarin.

synthesise, synthesis - to draw together and combine information or ideas from a variety of sources; a synthesis is a
clear and succinct summary of these combined ideas

tempo (e.g. speech tempo) - the speed at which spoken words are delivered, e.g. in a speech or performance of a
poem

testimony - a formal statement saying that something is true, OR a fact or situation that proves very clearly that
something exists or is true

text type - text types are broad categories of texts defined by their purpose, structure and language features, e.g.
recount, procedure, information report, narrative, explanation, discussion

tone - tone is the emotional message of a text. In a written text it is achieved through words (e.g. neutral words to
create an objective tone). In a film it could be created through music or the setting.

turn-taking conventions - customs of behaviour and attitudes that people accept in order to cooperate and
communicate

understatement- a statement which is not strong enough to express the true or full facts or feelings, e.g. To say I am
angry is the understatement of the year.

visualise (visualising) - to form a picture of someone or something in your mind

vivid - something that is particularly clear, bright, or seems very real

voice projection - to enable listeners to hear clearly what you are saying; to “throw” your voice into an audience

 110
 word attack skills - strategies for working out the meaning of unfamiliar words by recognising parts of them, e.g. that
rearrange suggests that the action is being repeated because of the prefix re

word family - A group of words that share a common root, to which different prefixes and suffixes are added, e.g.
agree - agreeable, agreement, disagree, disagreement

 111