Subject: Advances in Social Sciences Research Journal Call For Papers - Vol. 13, No. 06 - June 2026
Sender: Thomas Harvey<assrj@scholarpublishing.org>
Recipients: To:​  Byron Bunt​
Received: 

 Hi Byron Bunt! Publish your research in professional manner with high visibility. View this email in your browser Advances in Social Sciences Research Journal Call For Papers - Vol. 13, No. 06 - June 2026 Dear Byron Bunt! We came across your article titled "Pie-Eyed: Adapting MtG Elements to Create a New Card Came Called Dogs of War" that was published in "Advances in Applied Sociology". It was impressive and caught our interest in inviting you to publish your research with Advances in Social Sciences Research Journal (ASSRJ). We are a distinguished organization that publishes remarkable, double-blind peer-reviewed, internationally acknowledged journals with global prominence. We follow COPE and Research Councils United Kingdom standards and are in association with researchers from 150 countries, in the leading disciplines like computer science, engineering, science, management, applied science, social science, and humanities. Your research paper also matches the journal's scope. Hence, we would like you to publish your next research paper in our international, peer-reviewed, refereed journal. Email Manuscript l Submit Online Click Here to View Previously Published Articles. Who Are We? Advances in Social Sciences Research Journal [ASSRJ] is a monthly journal based in United Kingdom that is open access and peer reviewed. We aim to promote research by helping researchers around the globe to get deserved credit for their creative work by publishing their manuscripts. Why Publish with ASSRJ? Simply because we provide you valuable and affordable services such as; Open Access: All articles are accessible to everyone all over the world for free. Citation: Each article is assigned a unique and permanent Digital Object Identifier [DOI]number which is used for citation immediately after publication. Online First: Accepted articles are published online with DOI assigned within 5 working days of acceptance. Online Tracking System: You can login on the journal website anytime to track the progress and status of your manuscript. High Visibility: We are indexed/listed in Google Scholar, Microsoft Academic Research, CrossRef, Index Copernicus, Open JGate, Econbib and other such databases. Persistent Archival: Archived in CLOCKSS to ensure long-term preservation of your content. Low Cost: Article Publication Charges are 174.99 £ Only and many more . . . We Hope to work with you in a long lasting cooperation that you will not regret. Best Wishes Thomas Harvey Editorial Assistant Advances in Social Sciences Research Journal United Kingdom Important Deadlines Manuscript Submission: 15 June 2026 Author Notifications: 25 June 2026 Publication of Vol. 13 No. 06 30 June 2026 Your Contribution - Research Results - Empirical Findings - Academic Projects - Case Studies - Book Reviews - Review Articles - Biographies - Survey Results Copyright © 2026 Society for Science and Education, United Kingdom, All rights reserved. Journal publication and subscription Our mailing address is: Society for Science and Education, United Kingdom 5 Cedarwood Avenue, Stockport Greater Manchester, Lancashire SK4 2BT United Kingdom Add us to your address book Want to change how you receive these emails? You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list