National Curriculum Statement (NCS)
MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY

 Curriculum Assessment
 Policy Statement

 GRADES 10 – 12
 DISCLAIMER

In view of the stringent time requirements encountered by the Department of Basic Education to effect the necessary
editorial changes and layout adjustments to the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements and the supplementary
policy documents, possible errors may have occurred in the said documents placed on the official departmental website.

If any editorial, layout, content, terminology or formulae inconsistencies are detected, the user is kindly requested to
bring this to the attention of the Department of Basic Education.

E-mail: capscomments@dbe.gov.za or fax (012) 328 9828

Department of Basic Education

222 Struben Street

Private Bag X895

Pretoria 0001

South Africa

Tel: +27 12 357 3000

Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street Private Bag X9023

Cape Town 8000

South Africa

Tel: +27 21 465 1701

Fax: +27 21 461 8110

Website:http://www.education.gov.za

© 2014 Department of Basic Education

ISBN: 978- 4315-0573-9

Design and Layout by: Department of Basic Education

Printed by: Government Printing Works
 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY
 STATEMENT (CAPS) GRADES 10 – 12

 MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 1
 FOREWORD BY THE MINISTER
 Our national curriculum is the culmination of our efforts over a period of seventeen
 years to transform the curriculum bequeathed to us by apartheid. From the start of
 democracy we have built our curriculum on the values that inspired our Constitution
 (Act 108 of 1996). The Preamble to the Constitution states that the aims of the
 Constitution are to:

 • heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values,
 social justice and fundamental human rights;

 • improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person;

 • lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is
 based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by law; and

 • build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a
 sovereign state in the family of nations.

Education and the curriculum have an important role to play in realising these aims.

In 1997 we introduced outcomes-based education to overcome the curricular divisions of the past, but the experience
of implementation prompted a review in 2000. This led to the first curriculum revision: the Revised National Curriculum
Statement Grades R-9 and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (2002).

Ongoing implementation challenges resulted in another review in 2009 and we revised the Revised National Curriculum
Statement (2002) to produce this document.

From 2012 the two 2002 curricula, for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12 respectively, are combined in a single document
and will simply be known as the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. The National Curriculum Statement for
Grades R-12 builds on the previous curriculum but also updates it and aims to provide clearer specification of what is to
be taught and learnt on a term-by-term basis.

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 accordingly replaces the Subject Statements, Learning Programme
Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines with the

(a) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS) for all approved subjects listed in this document;

(b) National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement
 Grades R – 12; and

(c) National Protocol for Assessment Grades R – 12.

MRS ANGIE MOTSHEKGA, MP
MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION

 2 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 CONTENTS
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSEMENT POLICY STATEMENTS FOR 5
 MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY

1.1 Background 5

1.2 Overview 5

1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum 6

1.4 Time Allocation 7

 1.4.1 Foundation Phase 7

 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase 7

 1.4.3 Senior Phase 7

 1.4.4 Grades 10 – 12 8

SECTION 2: MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 9

2.1 What is Mechanical Technology? 9

 2.1.1 Fitting and Turning 10

 2.1.2 Automotive 11

 2.1.3 Welding and Metalwork 11

2.2 Specific aims 12

2.3 Requirements to offer Mechanical Technology 13

2.4 Subject offering by learners taking Mechanical Technology 14

2.5 Human Resources 14

2.6 Equipped Workshop 14

2.7 Sustainable Support 15

2.8 Career opportunities in Mechanical Technology 16

SECTION 3: CONTENT OUTLINE 18

3.1 Content outline per term: Fitting and Machining 20

 3.1.1 Fitting and Machining: Grade 10 20

 3.1.2 Fitting and Machining: Grade 11 27

 3.1.3 Fitting and Machining: Grade 12 33

3.2 Content outline per term: Automotive 42

 3.2.1 Automotive: Grade 10 42

 3.2.2 Automotive: Grade 11 51

 3.2.3 Automotive: Grade 12 56

3.3 Content outline per term: Welding and Metalwork 62

 3.3.1 Welding and Metalwork: Grade 10 62

 3.3.2 Welding and Metalwork: Grade 11 69

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 3
 3.3.3 Welding and Metalwork: Grade 12 76

SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT 82

4.1 Introduction 82

4.2 Informal or daily assessment (Assessment for Learning) 82

4.3 Formal assessment (ASSESSMENT of Learning) 83

 4.3.1 Formal assessment requirements 83

4.4 Projects 84

4.5 Assessment 85

 4.5.1 Programme of Assessment 85

 4.5.2 Tests 86

 4.5.3 Examinations 87

4.6 Recording 87

4.7 Reporting 88

4.8 Moderation of assessment 88

 4.8.1 PAT moderation 89

 4.8.2 SBA moderation 89

4.9 Practical Assessment Task (PAT) 90

4.10 Progression/promotion 91

4.11 General 91

 4.11.2 National policy pertaining to the program and promotion requirements of the National 91
 Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12

 4.11.2 Policy Document, National Protocol for Assessment Grade R – 12 91

 4 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SECTION 1
INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSEMENT POLICY STATEMENTS FOR MECHANICAL
 TECHNOLOGY

1.1 Background

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the
schooling sector.

To improve its implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming into
effect in January 2011. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was developed for each
subject to replace the old Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines in
Grades R – 12.

The amended National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12: Curriculum and Assessment Policy (January 2011)
replaces the National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 9 (2002) and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10 –
12 (2004).

1.2 Overview

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (January 2011) represents a policy statement for learning and
 teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy documents for each approved school subject as listed in the policy
 document National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework
 (NQF); and

 (ii) The policy document National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications
 Framework (NQF).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (January 2011) should be read in conjunction with the following
 documents:

 (i) An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the
 National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol for Assessment Grade R – 12,
 published in the Government Gazette, No. 29467 of 11 December 2006; and

 (ii) An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the
 National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special needs, published in the
 Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006.

(c) The Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines for Grades R – 9
 and Grades 10 – 12 are repealed and replaced by the Curriculum and Assessment Policy documents for Grades
 R – 12 (January 2011).

(d) The sections on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy as outlined in sections 2, 3 and 4 of this document
 constitute the norms and standards of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 and therefore, in terms
 of section 6A of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of Basic
 Education to determine minimum outcomes and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the
 assessment of learner achievement to be applicable to public and independent schools.

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 5
 1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 gives expression to what is regarded to be knowledge, skills
 and values worth learning. It will ensure that learners acquire and apply knowledge and skills in ways that are
 meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes the idea of grounding knowledge in local
 contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 serves the purposes of:

• Equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability or intellectual
 ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment and meaningful participation in society
 as citizens of a free country;

• Providing access to higher education;

• Facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and

• Providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 is based on the following principles:

• Social transformation; ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that equal
 educational opportunities are provided for all sections of our population;

• Active and critical learning; encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than rote and uncritical
 learning of given truths;

• High knowledge and high skills; the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at each grade are
 specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;

• Progression; content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

• Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice; infusing the principles and practices of social and
 environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The National
 Curriculum Statement Grades 10 – 12 (General) is sensitive to issues of diversity such as poverty, inequality,
 race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;

• Valuing indigenous knowledge systems; acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country as important
 contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

• Credibility, quality and efficiency; providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and depth to those
 of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

• Identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;

• Work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

• Organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;

• Collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

• Communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;

• Use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the environment and the
 health of others; and

• Demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem solving
 contexts do not exist in isolation.

 6 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 (e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This can only
 happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to learning, and how
 to plan for diversity.

1.4 Time Allocation

1.4.1 Foundation Phase

The instructional time for subjects in the Foundation Phase is as indicated in the table below:

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 4 (5)
 Mathematics 7
 Life Skills 6
 Beginning Knowledge 1 (2)
 Arts and Craft 2
 Physical Education 2
 Health Education 1

Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours. For Grade 3, First Additional Language is allocated 5 hours and
Beginning Knowledge is allocated 2 hours, as indicated by the hours in brackets in the table above.

1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

The table below shows the subjects and instructional times in the Intermediate Phase.

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Mathematics 6
 Science and Technology 3.5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4
 Creative Arts 1.5
 Physical Education 1.5
 Religion Studies 1

1.4.3 Senior Phase

The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)
 Home Language 5
 First Additional Language 4
 Mathematics 4.5
 Natural Sciences 3
 Social Sciences 3
 Technology 2
 Economic Management Sciences 2
 Life Orientation 2
 Arts and Culture 2

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 7
 1.4.4 Grades 10 – 12

The instructional time in Grades 10 – 12 is as follows:

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)
 Home Language 4.5
 First Additional Language 4.5
 Mathematics / Technical Mathematics 4.5
 Life Orientation
 Three Electives 2
 12 (3x4h)

The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified above, and may
not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish to pursue additional
subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

 8 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SECTION 2
 MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY

2.1 What is Mechanical Technology?

Mechanical Technology focuses on concepts and principles in the mechanical (motor, mining, shipping, rail, power-
generation etc.) environment and on technological processes. It embraces practical skills and the application of scientific
principles. This subject aims to create and improve the engineering and manufacturing environment to enhance the quality
of life of both the individual and society alike, and ensure the sustainable use of the natural environment and resources.

The subject Mechanical Technology will consist of a compulsory generic core and a specialised elective in one of the
above disciplines.

Embedded in this subject are the following disciplines:

Automotive: encompassing petrol and diesel driven vehicles, motor cycles, lawnmowers and tractor mechanics;

Fitting and Machining: includes turning, milling, cutting, shaping, fitting of keys, couplings, bushes, shafts and bearings;

Welding and Metalwork: includes welding (gas, electric, MIG/MAGS), developments, working with sheet metal and
the manufacturing of structures.

This field does NOT include Panel Beating, Spray Painting, Motor Body Building, parts of Farm Mechanics and Air-
conditioning.

The foundations of Mechanical Technology

During the activities, the learner engages in investigating, diagnosing, adjusting, removing, replacing, designing,
manufacturing and applying the necessary skills to provide solutions to problems in mechanical systems, processes
and components. Mechanical Technology is however not limited to these processes.

It affords learners with opportunities for life-long learning, self-development, empowerment, awareness of human rights,
and exposure to socio-economic and environmental injustices, access to latest international trends and innovations, and
an awareness of the process of globalisation.

Valuing indigenous knowledge systems, it acknowledges the rich history and heritage of this country as important
contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution.

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 9
 Apply solutions – vocational specific learning

This learning describes a core set of skills that can be developed through projects, simulations and real life applications
that are needs driven and sensitive to environmental impact. An integrating approach, to structure projects that develop
the learner’s skills, knowledge, values and attitudes in a holistic way, should be adopted.

• Repair / Make / Maintenance:

This aspect provides the opportunity for the learner to use tools, equipment and materials to solve / for monitoring the
identified problems, needs or opportunities. The making should be according to the specific design or the manufacturer’s
specifications. Repairs include the removal of defective parts and the replacement of fixed or new parts. All work must
always be undertaken in a safe and healthy environment. The necessary safety measures and precautions against
injuries should be applied with due consideration to HIV /AIDS.

• Evaluate:

The learner has to evaluate products, actions, decisions and results throughout the process, and where necessary
changes or improvements should be recommended and implemented. Evaluation should be done against the applicable
criteria that may be given or developed. This stage requires the use of probing questions, fair testing and analysis.

• Communicate:

The assessment evidence of the process followed in any project is: the ability to analyse, investigate, plan, design, draw,
report, evaluate and communicate. All reports, designs, assessment forms and assessment records should be kept in
a Portfolio file.

Links with GET, Alternative Education and Training and Career Pathways

Links with GET: The study of Mechanical Technology builds on the systems and controls, structures and processes
as found in the technology curriculum statement for the GET. It serves to further develop the learner’s knowledge
and understanding of gears, levers and pulleys. The learner is also exposed to the use and application of mechanical
advantages, designs, and the structures as applied in design to promote safety and efficiency.

Career Pathways: The curriculum is designed to incorporate the career fields of Fitting and Machining, Automotive,
and Welding and Metalworking. Elements of entrepreneurship have been included to provide learners with the ability to
identify business opportunities in the engineering industry.

2.1.1 Fitting and Turning

Focuses on the manufacturing and machining of machines parts using processes such as lathe turning, milling, cutting,
shaping, fitting of keys, couplings, bushes, shafts and bearings.

Turning is a machining process in which a cutting tool, typically a non-rotary tool bit, moves more or less linearly while
the work piece rotates.

Turning can be done manually, in a traditional form of lathe, or by using an automated lathe. Today the most common
type of such automation is computer numerical control, better known as CNC. (CNC is also commonly used with many
other types of machining besides turning.)

When turning, a piece of relatively rigid material is rotated and a cutting tool is traversed along axes of motion to produce
precise diameters and depths. Turning can be either on the outside of the cylinder or on the inside (also known as
boring) to produce tubular components of various geometries.

The turning processes are typically carried out on a lathe, considered to be the oldest machine tools, and can be of four
different types, namely straight turning, taper turning, profiling or external grooving. These types of turning processes
can produce various shapes of materials such as straight, conical, curved or grooved work pieces. In general, turning

 10 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 uses simple, single-point cutting tools. Each group of work piece materials have an optimum set of tool angles which
have been developed through the years.

Milling operates on the principle of rotary motion. A milling cutter is spun about an axis while a work piece is advanced
through it in such a way that the cutters are able to shave chips of material. This non-continuous cutting operation means
that no surface cut by a milling machine will ever be completely smooth; at a very close level (microscopic for very fine
feed rates), it will always contain regular ridges.

2.1.2 Automotive

Encompassing petrol and diesel driven vehicles, motor cycles, lawnmowers, generators and tractor mechanics.

The automotive industry is a term that covers a wide range of companies and organisations involved in the design,
development, manufacture, repair marketing, aftermarket products and selling of motor vehicles, motorcycles, mopeds
and recovery and repair of damaged and stolen vehicles. It is one of the world's most important economic sectors by
revenue.

Modern automotive engineering, along with aerospace engineering and marine engineering, is a branch of vehicle
engineering, incorporating elements of mechanical, electrical, electronic, software and safety engineering as applied to
the design, manufacture and operation of motorcycles, automobiles, buses and trucks and their respective engineering
subsystems. This includes entities such as:

Safety Engineering, Fuel Economy/Emissions, Vehicle Dynamics (ride, handling, steering, braking, comfort and traction),
Design of the chassis systems of suspension (steering, braking, structure (frame), wheels and tires, and traction
control); Vehicle Electronics (responsible for operational controls such as the throttle, brake and steering controls; as
well as many comfort and convenience systems such as the HVAC, infotainment and lighting systems. It would not
be possible for automobiles to meet modern safety and fuel economy requirements without electronic controls); Shift
Quality (as influenced by the powertrain (engine, transmission), and the vehicle (driveline, suspension, engine and
powertrain mounts, etc.); Drivability (cold starts and stalls, RPM dips, idle response, launch hesitations and stumbles,
and performance levels).

2.1.3 Welding and Metalwork

Includes welding (gas, electric, MIG/MAGS), developments, working with sheet metal and the manufacturing of
structures.

Welding is a fabrication or sculptural process that joins materials, usually metals or thermoplastics, by causing
coalescence. This is often done by melting the work pieces and adding a filler material to form a pool of molten material
(the weld pool) that cools to become a strong joint, with pressure sometimes used in conjunction with heat, or by itself,
to produce the weld. This is in contrast with soldering and brazing, which involve melting a lower-melting-point material
between the work pieces to form a bond between them, without melting the work pieces.

Many different energy sources can be used for welding, including a gas flame, an electric arc, a laser, an electron beam,
friction and ultrasound. While often an industrial process, welding may be performed in many different environments,
including open air, under water and in outer space. Welding is a potentially hazardous undertaking and precautions
are required to avoid burns, electric shock, vision damage, inhalation of poisonous gases and fumes, and exposure to
intense ultraviolet radiation.

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 11
 Modern welding techniques include manual methods like shielded metal arc welding, now one of the most popular
welding methods, as well as semi-automatic and automatic processes such as gas metal arc welding, submerged arc
welding, flux-cored arc welding and electroslag welding. Developments continued with the invention of laser beam
welding, electron beam welding, electromagnetic pulse welding and friction stir welding in the latter half of the century.
Robot welding is commonplace in industrial settings, and researchers continue to develop new welding methods and
gain greater understanding of weld quality.

Metalworking is the process of working with metals to create individual parts, assemblies, or large scale structures. The
term covers a wide range of work from large ships and bridges to precise engine parts and delicate jewellery. It therefore
includes a correspondingly wide range of skills, processes and tools. Metalworking is a science, art, hobby, industry
and trade. Modern metalworking processes, though diverse and specialized, can be categorized as forming, cutting, or
joining processes. Today's machine shop includes a number of machine tools capable of creating a precise, useful work
piece.

2.2 Specific aims

• The learner in Mechanical Technology needs to be interested in any form of mechanical entities. This can be cars,
 planes, trains, welding, maintenance etc.

• In order to be successful, the learner must also enrol preferably in Mathematics, Physical Science and Engineering
 Graphics and Design, as they all form part of the technical studying field.

• Mechanical Technology in essence is applied science, as the field of work includes trigonometry, Newton’s laws
 and chemical equations when dealing with certain welding techniques, fuel combustion, fuel injection, cooling
 systems etc.

The main topics in Mechanical Technology are:

• Safety – Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Act;

• Tools and equipment;

• Materials – ferrous and non-ferrous materials and alloys, and the iron-carbon equilibrium diagram;

• Terminology – manufacturing processes with reference to lathes (diameter turning, taper cutting, screw cutting)
 and milling machines (cutting methods, dividing head, centring of cutter);

• Joining methods – permanent (welding) and semi-permanent (bolts, nuts and rivets) joints;

• Forces – forces, moments, Young’s modulus, stress and strain;

• Maintenance;

• Systems and control:

• Mechanical – gears, belts, pulleys, power transmission, chains, clutches, cams, levers, etc.;

• Hydraulics – pistons, valves, Pascal’s law;

• Pneumatics;

• Electrical wiring – starting and charging circuits;

• Electronic applications – anti-lock braking system (ABS), fuel injection, air bag control, etc.;

• Engines – diesel and petrol, four and two stroke;

• Pumps – centrifugal, water; and

• Turbines – super and turbo chargers.

 12 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 2.3 Requirements to offer Mechanical Technology

(a) Each learner should have

 i. A textbook;

 ii. Access to a variety of mechanical engineering and industrial magazines and reference books;

 iii. Drawing equipment; and

 iv. A calculator.

(a) Learners should have access to computers with a CAD programme at school.

(b) The school should subscribe to at least one or two industrial and mechanical engineering magazines for the
 teacher to keep abreast with the latest developments in the industrial environment. These magazines could
 also be lent out to learners (in the same way as library books). These resources must be readily available in the
 classroom or in the library.

(c) The teacher should have a variety of reference books, charts and brochures in the classroom to stimulate the
 learners’ interest in the subject.

(d) The teacher should have access to the internet to be able to source, download and print relevant and new
 information, as the industry environment is a dynamic one with constant new trends and developments. The
 teacher should also have electronic mail facilities, as new information from subject advisors and other sources
 need to be downloaded via electronic mail. The teacher needs to be trained in the context and content of the
 subject.

(e) Schools offering Mechanical Technology must have a well-equipped workshop for learners to complete the
 practical assessment tasks. The classroom/workshop needs to be secure, with doors that lock, and burglar-proof.
 Enough storage space should be available to store and lock all resources. Resources to offer Mechanical Technology
 as a subject are the responsibility of the school. The school should build up a collection of models, e.g. by asking
 learners, parents and/or mechanical, electrical and electronic repair workshops and suppliers to donate models.

(f) Subject advisers must provide regular support to the teachers.

2.4 Subject offering by learners taking Mechanical Technology

Learners taking Mechanical Technology will be required to make a selection from the following choices:

 Choice 1 Choice 2
 Mathematics Technical Mathematics
 Physical Science Technical Science
 Mechanical Technology Mechanical Technology
 Engineering Graphics & Design Engineering Graphics & Design

Additionally, a learner may opt to take an eighth and ninth subject with these packages. Subjects considered as additional
subjects that have a strong linkage with Mechanical Technology are:

• Computer Applications Technology

• Information Technology

• Electrical Technology

• Civil Technology

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 13
 Exercising these options at a school, the following prerequisites/requirements are brought to the attention of the school
management team:

• Availability of resources at the school

• Availability of a teacher to offer the subject outside normal contact time

• Adherence to all assessment requirements in terms of SBA and PAT

• A learner needs to take the subject in Grade 10, 11 and 12 and not only in Grade 12.

2.5 Human Resources

Mechanical Technology requires a trained subject specialist. It is preferred that the teacher offering mechanical
technology is an artisan / technician / technical teacher in a Mechanical-related area. Industry-related experience and
workshop management skills are essential as is a tertiary qualification in technical teaching.

Mechanical Technology teachers are required to:

• Teach the subject content with confidence and flair

• Interact with learners in a relaxed but firm manner

• Manage the workshop resourcing, budget & safety

• Manage the teaching environment

• Conduct stock taking and inventory

• Plan for practical work

• Plan for theory lessons

• Conduct weekly practical sessions

• Maintain and service the workshop as a whole

• Maintain and service the tools and instruments

• Ensure learner safety

• Produce working PAT projects in cooperation with learners

• Carry out School-based Assessment (SBA)

• Implement innovative methods to keep the subject interesting

• Are self-motivated to keep her/him abreast of the latest technological developments

• Regularly attend skills workshops

2.6 Equipped Workshop

Mechanical Technology cannot be implemented in a school without a well-equipped workshop.

Electricity supply to the workshop is crucial and a three phase, four-wire supply is needed. Lighting and ventilation is
of extreme importance and a workshop should ideally have multiple exits with doors that open outward. Windowpanes
should be fitted and broken panes should be replaced.

Tools and equipment should have sufficient storage and a well-developed storage management system with an up to
date inventory. Shelves should be clearly marked and storage areas defined.

Floors should have the needed demarcated markings and all areas should be clearly defined using green, yellow and
black paint, in line with industry standards. No carpets or nylon flooring is allowed. Rubber mats should be installed in
areas where learners will work with installations that will be energized.

 14 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Walls should contain subject related posters and a designated area where learner projects can be exhibited should be
clearly visible.

Good housekeeping principles require that all workshops be cleaned regularly. A suitable waste removal system should
be in place to accommodate refuse, off-cut materials as well as chemical waste. The Occupational Health and Safety
(OHS) Act 85 of 1993 must be complied with at all times.

Instruments, measuring equipment and training equipment should have dust covers to keep it clean.

A workshop assistant for the Mechanical Technology workshop is required to service the workshop. The purpose of this
assistant is to perform preventative maintenance, maintenance, upgrading, service and repair of devices in cooperation
with the subject teacher.

The workshop assistant is also required to assist in the safe preparation and completion of practical sessions with
regards to issuing equipment and tools, keeping register of all equipment and performing regular inventory stock taking.

An assistant in an Mechanical Technology workshop will be technically trained in heavy current / electronics / digital
electronics, depending on the focus of the specialisation at the school. The assistant will also have a sound working
knowledge of the OHS Act and workshop related safety.

Tables, workbenches and machinery on stands should be permanently affixed to the floor, with isolation switches for the
mains supply. All machines should have working machine guards.

The workshop must have a lockable mains distribution board. The workshop must be fitted with an emergency cut-off
switch/es which is / are easily accessible at all times. The red, mushroom type, emergency switch should preferably be
lockable to prevent accidental re-connection with mains in the case of it being activated.

No learner is permitted to work on a live installation without supervision. Installations are only to be energized upon
completion of work, after testing.

2.7 Sustainable Support

Mechanical Technology is a subject that requires sustained support. The Mechanical Technology workshop requires
regular resourcing for the purpose of completion of practical work as well as maintenance. Resourcing could be sub-
divided into the following categories:

• Safety Equipment

• Tools and Equipment

• Consumable Materials

• PAT Resources

• Teaching and Learning Support Material

• Preventative Maintenance

• Maintenance

School management teams (SMT) at schools offering Mechanical Technology should take note of the implications that
the Mechanical Technology workshop has on the budget of the school.

Whilst it is common practice to provide a working budget to a workshop, it is imperative to note that the budget should be
structured to not only cater for the completion of PAT by the learners, but should also allow for the teacher to replenish
tools and equipment, and to acquire consumable materials for experiments, demonstrations and simulations.

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 15
 Apart from the PAT resources needed, the teacher must also be allowed to supplement teaching and learning support
material in the form of posters, models, examples, videos, periodicals and more.

Preventative maintenance of training equipment on a regular basis, as well as provisioning for the inevitable failure of
equipment, should not be disregarded, and the SMT of a school should have in place a plan to regularly phase out and
replace obsolete equipment and tools.

2.8 Career opportunities in Mechanical Technology

• Apprenticeship to become an artisan such as a motor mechanic, fitter and turner, welder, boiler maker, tractor
 mechanic etc.

• Continued studies at a college in the NCV in a vocational career pathway

• Engineering studies in the fields of aviation, air-conditioning, motor cars, engines, ship building, power systems,
 electrical power stations etc.

• Studies at Higher Education Institutions (HEI’s) and Skills training institutions with reference to the various
 mechanical streams

• Entering the world of work as an entrepreneur in various fields such as precision machining, programming of
 lathes and milling machines, fitment of accessories to cars and trucks to enhance performance, maintenance of
 many different mechanical installations

• Research and development of new and current entities in the mechanical field of work

• Mechanical Technology does not have the distinction of being a Grade 12 exemption subject; it has the advantage
 of giving learners the background of what is expected from them when enrolling in any mechanical study
 opportunities.

• Specific career opportunities:

  Engineering – aviation, motor, trains, shipping, metallurgic etc.

  Fitter

  Machinist

  Gunsmith

  Motor mechanic

  Diesel mechanic

  Motorbike mechanic

  Farm mechanic

  Technician

  Instrument specialist

  Vehicle designer

  Auto electrician

  Specialized engine tuner and diagnostic analyst

  Suspension builder

  Blacksmith

  Jeweller

  Rigger

  Welder

 16 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
  Boilermaker

  Panel beater

  Exhaust fitter

  Brake and clutch fitter and machinist

  Upholsterer

  Draughtsman

  Toolmaker

  Automotive machinist and fitter

  Engine rebuilder

  Transmission machinist

  Roof truss developer

  Technical teacher

  Lecturer

  Technical trainer etc.

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 17
 SECTION 3
 Content Outline

Listed below are the topics per grade with a short explanation of the focus. Note that some topics are continued from
Grades 10 to 12, increasing in complexity from year to year, whilst other topics either form the basis for further study or
develop from previous topics.

 FITTING AND MACHINING
 PROGRESSION
 GRADE 10 GRADE 11 GRADE 12

 • Safety
 Basic first aid
 HIV/Aids Awareness
 OHS act
 Safe and hazardous
 conditions
 • Tools • Safety
 Hand tools Basic first Aid HIV/Aids Awareness
 Measuring tools OHS act • Safety
 Machine specific safety measures First Aid HIV/Aids
 • Materials
 • Tools Awareness
 GENERIC

 Characteristics and uses
 Purpose made tooling and equipment OHS act Machine specific
 • Joining Methods safety measures
 Drill and key sizes • Materials
 Semi-permanent joining Equipment used during manufacturing of • Materials
 steel Properties and Uses
 • Forces Properties of engineering materials Methods of enhancing the
 Types of forces properties of steel
 Basic calculations • Maintenance
 Malfunction of power tools due to lack of
 • Maintenance maintenance
 Properties of lubricants
 Lack of maintenance
 • Engines
 Operating principles of
 2 and 4 stroke internal
 combustion engines

 18 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 FITTING AND MACHINING
 PROGRESSION
 GRADE 10 GRADE 11 GRADE 12

 • Terminology • Tools • Terminology
 Readings on vernier Purpose made tooling and Indexing
 calipers and micrometres equipment Dovetail slides
 lathe function and • Terminology DRO programming
 purpose Lathe work Irregular work pieces
 Cutting procedures Taper turning Manufacturing a spur gear
 Screw cutting Screw cutting • Tools
 • Systems and Milling machine safety and parts Principles and functions of
 control Milling operations engineering equipment
 Identify various drive Calculations on depth and screw
 • Forces
 systems thread micrometres
 Effects of forces
 • Forces
 SPECIALISATION

 Velocity calculations Moments
 Screw threads Basic calculations on forces,
 Basic calculations on stress
 moments and stress and strain
 • Maintenance • Maintenance
 Causes of malfunction on lathes, Suitable preventative maintenance
 milling machines and power tools Coefficient of friction
 • Joining Methods • Joining Methods
 ISO metric V tread Calculations on size of drills for
 Calculations on size of drills and bolts and nuts ISO metric
 bolts Calculations on size of drills for
 • Systems and control bolts and nuts Square thread
 Functions, advantages and • Systems and control
 disadvantages of compound Mechanical components
 drives Velocity calculations
 Velocity calculations Transfer of movement
 Transfer of movement Hydraulics/Pneumatics
 Hydraulics and pneumatics
 • Pumps
 Purpose and operation of various
 pumps

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 19
 3.1 Content outline per term: Fitting and Machining

3.1.1 Fitting and Machining: Grade 10

 MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY: FITTING AND MACHINING

 GRADE 10

 GRADE 10: TERM 1 – FITTING AND MACHINING

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Organise and manage activities responsibly and effectively, including self-man-
 agement and HIV/Aids awareness;
 Safety precautions taken into account during performance-based activities in
 order to avoid injuries or incidents.
 Explain his/her rights, human rights, contributions and responsibilities.
 Understanding of the OHS Act
 Learners must be fully aware of all the safety precautions to be taken during
 performance-based activities, in order to avoid injuries or incidents. Refer spe-
 cifically to the following tools/machines/equipment:

 • Different hand tools
 • Pedestal drill
 • Lathe
 • Milling machine
 • Bench grinder
 • Guillotine
 • Bending machine
 • Power saws
 1-3 SAFETY
 • Two and/or four post lift, trolley jack and trestles
 12 hours (Generic)
 Identify safe and hazardous acts and conditions e.g. speed of emery
 wheels, etc.
 Apply personal hygiene measures.
 Refer specifically to the following tools/machines/equipment (refer to Topic 2:
 Tools):
 • Different hand tools
 • Pedestal drill
 • Pedestal grinder
 • Guillotine
 • Compressors
 • Fire extinguishing apparatus
 Practical:
 Identify safe and hazardous acts and conditions (e.g. speed of emery wheels,
 Maximum lift on hydraulic equipment etc.)
 Apply personal hygiene measures.

 Note: Clean workshop on a weekly basis

 20 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 1 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Simple readings on:
 • Vernier callipers
 • Outside, inside and depth micrometers
 Lathe:
 • Classification
 • Types of bed: V and flat and gap
 • Functions of:
  Feed shaft
  Head stock
  Lead screw
  Tail stock
  Carriage

 • Function and purpose of the 3- and 4-jaw chuck
 • Coolants (Application and advantages and disadvantages)
 • Cutting tool (high speed steel):
  Clearance angles
  Cutting angles
 TERMINOLOGY  Differentiate between high speed steel cutting tools and tungsten
 4-7 (Machining) tip tools
16 hours  Tool holders and boring bars (Types and uses)
 (Specific)
 • Apply cutting procedures for diameter turning and facing
 • Taper turning (Methods, Advantages and disadvantages):
  Compound slide
  Tail stock
  Taper turning attachment
  Cutting tool

 • Screw cutting (Compound slide – Theory only):
  Characteristics and elements of metric V-thread
  Parallel
  Half of the included angle of the thread
  Use of the screw thread pitch gauge and screw cutting gauge
 Practical:

 • Use the abovementioned measuring instruments and demonstrate the
 measurement of given sizes.
 • Facing and parallel turning of a work piece on the centre lathe.
 • Machining of an outside taper using the compound slide only on the
 same work piece used for the facing and parallel turning

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 21
 GRADE 10: TERM 1 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT

 Basic tools and equipment:
 • Spanners: ring-, flat- and combination-
 • Sockets and accessories
 • Pliers: combination, circlip, diagonal, long nose and water pump
 pliers, vice grip
 • Hammers: ball peen, soft face, cross pane, mallet
 • Chisels, hacksaws, scribers, punches
 • Screwdrivers: flat, Phillips/star and off set
 • Allen keys
 • Files, smooth; second cut and bastard: flat-, square-, triangle-,
 round and half round shapes
 • Stocks and dies
 8-9 TOOLS
8 hours (Generic) Identify and explain the functions of the THREE types of drilling machines,
 namely sensitive (pedestal and pillar types), radial and portable drills

 Application of measuring and marking-off instruments:
 • Steel Rule
 • Square
 • Scriber
 • Tape measure
 • Combination set
 • Punches

 Practical:
 Use the marking-off instruments to mark-off a plate (at least 5mm thick)
 with 5 holes.
 10 REVISION
4 hours
 11 CONTROL TEST
4 hours

 22 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 2 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT

 Basic calculations on the size of drills and key sizes:
 • Drill sizes for screw cutting
 • Width, thickness and length of keys

 Application of hand threading with the aid of the tap and die set

 Semi-permanent joining methods:
 • Bolts
 • Studs
 • Locking devices
 1-2 JOINING METHODS • Nuts
8 hours (Generic) • Split pins
 • Rivets
 • Keys – Identification, fitting and uses of the following types:
 • Parallel
 • Taper
 • Gib head
 • Woodruff keys
 Practical:
 Use the marking-off plate from Topic “Tools” and drill and tap two (2)
 holes.

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 23
 GRADE 10: TERM 2 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Forces:

 Differentiate between the different types of forces found in
 engineering components:

 • Pulling force (Tensile)
 • Compressive force
 • Shearing force

 Components of forces:

 • Triangle and parallelogram of forces – resultant of two forces
 graphically only;
 • Graphical and mathematical solution of the horizontal and vertical
 3-6 FORCES component of a single force acting at an angle.
16 hours (Generic)
 Moments:

 Moments found in engineering components (basic calculations):

 Definition:
 Moment = force x perpendicular distance
 (Spanner used to tighten a nut or bolt)

 Stress (Basic calculations on):
 • Square bar
 • Round bar

 Practical:
 Use basic calculations to determine forces, moments and stress

 24 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 2 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Properties of lubricants:
 • Viscosity
 • Pour point
 • Flash point

 Grading of oil according to viscosity: (SAE standards)

 • Transmission oil
 • Engine oil
 • Differential oil
 • Cutting fluid
 • Grease

 Friction:
 • Characteristics
 7-8 MAINTENANCE • Application
8 hours (Generic)
 Define the following types of maintenance:
 • Preventive
 • Predictive
 • Reliability centred maintenance

 Identify the outcome of the lack of maintenance on equipment
 used in the workshop:
 • Excessive wear
 • Overheating/seizing; and distortion (lack of cooling and lubrication)
 • Failure e.g. hydraulics/pneumatics, controls and cables

 Disadvantages of an unbalanced work piece or machine part

 Practical:
 Analyse and predict the outcome of the lack of maintenance on
 equipment used in the workshop
9 - 11 12 MID-YEAR
 hours EXAMINATION

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 25
 GRADE 10: TERM 3 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Characteristics, composition and use of:
 • Ferrous metals and alloys:
  Low carbon steel
  Medium carbon steel
  High carbon steel
  Cast iron:
  Grey cast iron
  White cast iron
  Stainless steel (manganese, chrome, vanadium, titanium,
 tungsten, molybdenum and cobalt)
 1 MATERIALS • Non-ferrous elements:
4 hours (Generic)  Copper, tin, lead, zinc, aluminium, nickel

 • Non-ferrous alloys:
  Brass, bronze, phosphor bronze, white metal, duralumin and
 solder

 Practical:

 • Collect a sample of 5 non-ferrous elements and 5 non-ferrous
 alloys

 • Give 2 uses for each sample collected

 GRADE 10: TERM 3 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 MECHANICAL:

 Identify different drive systems referring to (application, advantages,
 disadvantages):

 • Spur gears
 • Pulleys and belt drives
 • Chain drives

 Basic velocity calculations on:
 SYSTEMS AND CON-
 • Gears: (N1T1 = N2T2) (two gears)
 2–9 TROL
 • Pulleys: N1D1 = N2D2
32 hours (Drive systems)
 • Belt speed: V = πDN
 (Specific)
 Identification and application on the following screw threads
 (properties, uses, profiles and angles):
 • ISO Metric V-thread (fine and coarse)
 • Square thread
 • Acme thread

 Practical:
 Use basic calculations to determine basic velocity on gears and pulleys,
 including belt speed.
 10 REVISION
 11 TEST

 26 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 4 – FITTING AND MACHINING

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Operating principles of 2 and 4 stroke internal combustion engines.
 (Single cylinder spark ignition engines only):
 • Stroke
 1–2 ENGINES
 • Dead centre
 8 hours (Generic)
 • Cycle
 Practical: Demonstrate knowledge of the operating principles of the 2
 and 4 stroke internal combustion spark ignition engines

 3 REVISION

 4–9 FINAL EXAMINATION

3.1.2 Fitting and Machining: Grade 11

 FITTING AND MACHINING

 GRADE 11: TERM 1 – FITTING AND MACHINING

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 HIV/AIDS Awareness

 Knowledge of basic First Aid measures

 Analyse the OHS Act and regulations where applicable

 Applying machine-specific safety measures when dealing with:

 • Grinding machines (portable, bench and surface)
 1–3 SAFETY • Cutting machines (drilling machines, power saw, band saw)
 12 hours (Generic) • Press machines
 • Joining equipment (arc, gas)
 • Handling and storage of gas cylinders
 • Hydraulic operated equipment – hydraulic press

 Practical:
 Perform a first aid exercise to demonstrate action to be taken when a
 fellow learner hurts him/herself in the workshop.

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 27
 GRADE 11: TERM 1– FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Lathe:
 • Safety measures
 • Set up of irregular work pieces – 4 jaw chuck
 • Steadies (purpose and use)
 • Mandrels (purpose and use)
 • Taper turning (compound slide method – inside and outside tapers)

  Calculations for setting over of compound slide
 • Screw cutting
  Description of the pitch and leads for single- and multi-start
 screw threads
  Uses of screw thread dial gauge, pitch gauge, centre gauge
 and graduated collar when screw thread cutting is carried
 out
  Methods to determine the locating positions on the dial
 gauge
  Calculations of depth of V-threads
  Square thread (calculations of the helix, leading and
 following angles for the cutting tools)
 TERMINOLOGY Practical – Lathe:
 4–6 Machining • Set-up of an irregular work piece in a 4-jaw chuck
12 hours
 (Specific) • Use the lathe to do taper turning
 • Use the lathe to do V-thread screw cutting

 Milling machine:
 • Safety measures
 • Milling machine parts
 • Calculations on:
 • Centring of cutter
 • Cutting of key ways – parallel
 • Milling cutters (identification and uses):
 • Side and face cutter
 • End mill
 • Flute mill
 • T-slot mill
 • Helical cutter
 • Involute gear tooth cutter

 Practical – Milling machine:
 • Centring of cutter
 • Cutting of parallel key way

 28 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 11: TERM 1 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 The principles and functions of the following purpose-made tooling and
 equipment:

 • Stocks and dies (characteristics and drill sizes)
 • Grinding machines (portable, bench)
 • Cutting machines (drilling machines, power saw, horizontal band
7–8 TOOLS saw)
8 hours (Generic) • Guillotine machine (manual and power driven)
 • Press machines

 Practical:
 Explain the safety precautions to be followed when using the various
 cutting and grinding machines.

 The principles and functions of the following purpose-made tooling and
 equipment:
 • Dial indicators
 • Telescopic gauges
 • Torque wrenches
 • Inside micrometres (simple readings from the instruments, use of
 9 TOOLS
 attachments)
4 hours (Specific) Practical:
 Demonstrate competent use of:
 • Dial indicators
 • Telescopic gauges
 • Torque wrenches
 • Inside micrometres
 10 REVISION
 11 CONTROL TEST

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 29
 GRADE 11: TERM 2 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Forces:

 Effects of forces, moments and torques on engineering components
 applying design principles

 Basic calculations on:

 Forces found in engineering components:
 • System of forces (maximum of three forces)
 • Resultant and equilibrant

 Moments:
 1-4 FORCES
16 hours (Specific) Moments found in engineering components: (By calculation only)

 Law of moments:
 Sum of LHM = Sum of RHM

 A simply supported beam with two vertical point loads acting on the
 beam supported by two supports.

 Basic calculations on stress:
 • Square tubing
 • Round tubing
 Practical:
 Use basic calculations to determine forces, moments and stress

 GRADE 11: TERM 2 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Identify causes of malfunction of pedestal drill, power saw and pedestal
 grinder:
 • Lack of lubrication or incorrect lubrication
 MAINTENANCE • Overloading
 5
4 hours (Generic) • Friction

 Practical:
 Analyse and predict the outcome of the lack of maintenance on
 equipment used in the workshop.
 Identify causes of malfunction of lathes and milling machines.

 • Lack of lubrication or incorrect lubrication
 • Overloading
 6 MAINTENANCE • Friction
4 hours (Specific) • Balancing

 Practical:
 Analyse and predict the outcome of the lack of maintenance on
 equipment used in the workshop:

 30 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT

 Identify the characteristics of the ISO metric V-thread.

 Use basic calculations for the ISO metric V-thread:

 • Root diameter
 • Crest diameter
 • Effective diameter
 7-8 JOINING METHODS
 • Pitch
8 hours (Specific)
 • Lead for multi-start screw threads

 Practical:
 Use basic calculations to determine the following for ISO metric
 V-thread:
 • The drill size to tap a V-thread
 • Tap hole(s) according to bolt size

 MID-YEAR
 9 - 11
 EXAMINATION

 GRADE 11: TERM 3 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Function and operation of the following equipment used during the
 manufacturing of steel:

 • Blast furnace – refining of iron ore
 • Open-hearth furnace
 • Bessemer converter
 • Electric arc furnace
 1-4 MATERIALS • Rotor plant
16 hours (Generic) Distinguish between the following properties of engineering materials:
 • Hardness
 • Plasticity
 • Elasticity
 • Ductility
 • Malleability
 • Brittleness
 • Toughness

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 31
 GRADE 11: TERM 3 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 MECHANICAL COMPONENTS:

 Uses, functions, advantages and disadvantages of the following
 compound drives:
 • Gear train
 • Pulley systems (i.e. block and tackle)
 • V-Belt drives
 • Chain drives
 Basic velocity calculations on:
 • Gears (compound) Including idler gears
 • Pulley systems and
 • Belts (v-belts)
 Transfer of movement:
 SYSTEMS AND • Spur gears
 5-9 CONTROL  Gear Ratio
20 hours Drive systems
 (Specific)  Power transmission

 HYDRAULICS / PNEUMATICS

 Basic calculations on:

 Pistons and reservoirs (only a single cylinder): volume, pressure, force,
 area

 Description, identification and application of:
 Valves, pipes, pressure gauges

 Practical:
 Practically determine the transfer of movement of mechanical and
 hydraulic operating systems mentioned above including drive systems
 through a simple designed project
 10 REVISION
 11 CONTROL TEST

 GRADE 11: TERM 4 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Identify the following pumps by referring to purpose,
 construction and operating principles:

 1 PUMPS • Mono pumps
4 hours (Specific) • Centrifugal pumps
 • Reciprocating pumps
 • Gear pumps
 2–3 REVISION
 4–9 EXAMINATION

 32 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 3.1.3 Fitting and Machining: Grade 12

 FITTING AND MACHINING

 GRADE 12
 GRADE 12: TERM 1 – FITTING AND MACHINING

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 HIV/AIDS Awareness

 Knowledge of basic First Aid measures

 Analyse the OHS Act and regulations where applicable to the following
 machines:
 • Grinding machines (portable, bench and surface)
 • Cutting (drilling machines, power saw, band saw)
 • Shearing machines (manual and power driven)
 • Press machines
 • Joining (arc, gas)
 1-3 SAFETY • Handling and usage of gas cylinders
 12 hours (Generic)
 Knowledge and application of basic workshop layouts:
 • Process layout
 • Product layout

 Referring to the OHS Act, analyse the responsibilities of the:
 • Employer
 • Employee

 Practical:
 Compare the process and product layout of 2 different manufacturing or
 maintenance workshops

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 33
 GRADE 12: TERM 1 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Lathe:
 • Safety measures
 • Taper turning (compound slide method – inside and outside tapers)

  Calculations for setting over of compound slide and tail stock
 • Screw cutting
  Description of the pitch and leads for single- and multi-start
 screw threads
  Uses of screw thread dial gauge, pitch gauge, centre gauge
 and graduated collar when screw thread cutting is carried out
  Methods to determine the locating positions on the dial gauge
  Calculations of depth of V-threads and square threads
  Square thread (calculation of helix, leading and following
 angles for the cutting tools)
  Methods of cutting multi-start screw threads (Theory only):
 • Set over of compound slide
 • Change gear
 TERMINOLOGY
 4-5 Milling machine:
 Machining
8 hours
 (Specific) • Safety measures
 • Calculations on:

  Centring of cutter

  Cutting of keyways
 • Identifying and apply the following milling processes and describe the
 advantages and disadvantages:
  Gang milling
  Straddle milling
  Down cut
  Up cut
 Practical:
 • Use a lathe to do taper turning
 • Use a lathe to do multi-start screw cutting
 • Use a milling machine to show compliance on down cut and up cut
 milling
 • Use a milling machine to cut a parallel keyway

 34 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 12: TERM 1 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Indexing:
 • Calculations on the indexing for a square, pentagon and hexagon –
 including the depth of cut
 • Calculations of the following indexing processes:
  Rapid
  Simple
  Angular

  Differential
 Dovetail slides:
 • Calculation for internal and external dove tail with precision rollers
 • Calculation of included angle.
 • Test for accuracy
 Write a Digital Read Out (DRO) Program to incorporate cutting a
 recess on a work piece:
 • Explain the difference between DRO and CNC systems
 • Programming on a 3-axis digital readout system (“DRO”) on milling
 machines
 • Absolute and incremental reference systems
 TERMINOLOGY • Tools change position
 6-8
 Machining • Allowance for diameter thickness
12 hours
 (Specific) Balancing of irregular work pieces on a lathe:
 • Graphical solution to balance an unbalanced work piece on a face
 plate
 Manufacturing of spur gear:
 • Involute gear tooth form with a module of no more than 3
 • Calculations on:
  Number of teeth
  Pitch circle diameter
  Module
  Outside diameter
  Addendum
  Dedendum
  Full depth – cutting depth
  Working depth
  Clearance
  Circular pitch, choral tooth thickness, choral tooth addendum
  Indexing
 Practical:
 Use a milling machine to cut a spur gear.

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 35
 GRADE 12: TERM 1 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Describe the principles and functions of advanced engineering
 equipment:
 • Brinell and Rockwell hardness testers
 • Moments and forces testers
 • Tensile testers

 9 TOOLS Simple calculations on:
4 hours (Specific) • Depth micrometre
 • Screw thread micrometre (included angle)

 Practical:
 • Do tests by using the above advanced engineering equipment
 • Use micrometres to take different measurements
 10 REVISION
 11 CONTROL TEST

 GRADE 12: TERM 2 – FITTING AND MACHINING

 SPECIFIC CONTENT

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Forces:
 Basic calculations:
 • System of forces (maximum of four forces)
 • Resultant and equilibrant

 Moments:

 Moments found in engineering components: (By calculation only)

 A simply supported beam with two vertical point loads and one uniformly
 distributed load (UDL) acting on the beam including reactions at the
 supports (only two)
 1-4 FORCES
16 weeks (Specific) Stress/Strain:

 Basic calculations on:
 • Stress,
 • Strain (Stress/Strain diagram only for mild steel),
 • Safety factor,
 • Modulus of elasticity and
 • Change in length.

 Practical:
 Use basic calculations to determine forces, moments and stress

 36 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 12: TERM 2 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Suitable preventative maintenance in operating systems for:
 • Gear,
 • Belt and
 • Chain drives.

 The use of the following materials for bushes and gears:
 • Thermoplastic composites :
  Nylon
  Teflon
  Poly Vinyl Composite (PVC)
  Vesconite
 • Thermo hardened (Thermosetting) composites
 5-6 MAINTENANCE  Carbon Fibre
8 hours (Specific)  Glass Fibre
  Bakelite
 Minimum and maximum coefficient of friction for the following
 different materials:
 • Copper,
 • Cast iron,
 • Thermo composites,
 • Stainless steel,
 • White metal, and
 • Rubber

 Practical:
 Collect and identify samples of Thermoplastic and Thermo hardened
 composites

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 37
 GRADE 12: TERM 2 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Use basic calculations on the size of drills for bolts and nuts (ISO metric):
 • Root diameter
 • Crest diameter
 • Effective diameter
 • Pitch
 • Lead for multi-start screw threads

 Use basic calculations on the size of drills for bolts and nuts (Square
 thread):
 7-8 JOINING METHODS • Crest diameter
8 hours (Specific) • Effective diameter
 • Pitch
 • Lead for multi-start screw threads
 • Helix angle
 • Following angle – cutting tool – support by means of a clear drawing
 • Leading angle – cutting tool - support by means of a clear drawing
 • Clearance angle - support by means of a clear drawing

 Practical:
 Use basic calculations to determine the dimensions of a square thread

 MID-YEAR
9 - 11
 EXAMINATION

 GRADE 12: TERM 3 – FITTING AND MACHINING

 SPECIFIC CONTENT

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Identify materials by:
 • Sound test
 • Bending test
 • Filing test and
 • Machining test

 Methods of enhancing the properties of steel (only heated temperature
 and cooling apply):

 • Tempering
 1-2 MATERIALS • Case hardening
8 hours (Generic) • Hardening
 • Annealing
 • Normalising

 Practical:
 Test FOUR different types of materials using the:
 • Sound test
 • Bending test
 • Filing test
 • Machining test

 38 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 12: TERM 3 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 MECHANICAL COMPONENTS:
 Uses, functions, advantages and disadvantages of the following drive
 systems:
 • Gears
 • Pulleys
 • Belts (V- and flat) and
 • Chains
 Basic power and velocity calculations on:
 • Gears – Transmission of torque (T=Fr) and power (P=2πNT/60)
 • Gears (compound): Angular velocity and direction of rotation –
 including idler gears
 • V-belts, chains and pulleys: Linear velocity (V=πDN), and angular
 velocity (N1D1=N2D2)
 HYDRAULICS / PNEUMATICS
 Applied calculations on:
 SYSTEMS AND
 • Pistons and reservoirs – hydraulic jack (ram and plunger)
 3-6 CONTROL
 • The force exerted in a closed circuit.
16 hours Drive systems Identification and use of hydraulic components indicated by the
 (Specific) symbols:
 • Motor
 • Pump
 • Filter
 • One-way valve
 • Spring-loaded double-action control valve
 • Pressure gauge
 • Non-return valve
 • Reservoir

 Practical – hydraulics:
 Design and illustrate schematically a double-action hydraulic control system
 Practical – mechanical systems:
 Use basic calculations to determine the outcome of the abovementioned
 drive systems
 TRIAL
 7 - 11
 EXAMINATION

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 39
 GRADE 12: TERM 4 – FITTING AND MACHINING

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
1–3 REVISION

4–9 EXAMINATION

 AUTOMOTIVE
 PROGRESSION
 GRADE 10 GRADE 11 GRADE 12
 • Safety
 (HIV/Aids Awareness);
 • Tools
 Hand tools
 Measuring tools;
 • Safety
 • Materials
 Basic first Aid HIV/Aids Awareness
 Characteristics and uses
 OHS act
 • Forces
 Machine specific safety measures • Safety
 Types of forces
 • Tools First Aid HIV/Aids Awareness
GENERIC

 Basic calculations
 Purpose made tooling and OHS act Machine-specific safety
 • Maintenance
 equipment measures
 Properties of lubricants
 • Materials • Materials
 Friction Lack of
 Equipment used during Properties and Uses
 maintenance
 manufacturing of steel Methods of enhancing the
 • Joining Methods
 Properties of engineering materials properties of steel
 Calculations on drill and
 • Maintenance
 key sizes
 Malfunction of power tools due to
 Semi-permanent joining
 lack of maintenance
 methods
 • Engines
 Operating principles of
 2 and 4 stroke internal
 combustion engines

 AUTOMOTIVE
 PROGRESSION
 GRADE 10 GRADE 11 GRADE 12

 40 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Terminology • Tools • Tools
 Single plate clutch Purpose-made tooling and Application of diagnostic
 Manual gearbox equipment, dial indicators, equipment
 Function and operation of telescopic gauges and measuring • Forces
 drive shafts instruments Automotive calculations
 • Maintenance • Terminology • Maintenance
 Lubrication systems Workshop administration Use test equipment to diagnose
 Temperature control • Forces faults
 Cooling systems Automotive calculations and • Systems and control
 Maintain fluid levels application Operation and function of the
 • Systems and • Maintenance automatic gearbox
SPECIALISATION

 control Engine lubrication Steering geometry
 Basic carburetion Oil pumps purpose and operation Electricity
 Air filters Oil control • Engines
 Hydraulic brake system • Systems and control Crankshafts
 • Engines Final drives Construction and operation of
 Identification and function Purpose and layout of drive turbo chargers
 of engine components systems
 Conventional lay-outs Hydraulic brakes
 Axles
 Steering control Suspension
 layouts
 Electricity conventional ignition
 systems
 Starting circuit
 Supplemental systems, traction
 control and air bag control
 • Engines
 CI engines
 Injectors
 Valve assemblies

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 41
 3.2 Content outline per term: Automotive

3.2.1 Automotive: Grade 10

 MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY: AUTOMOTIVE

 GRADE 10 – TERM 1

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Organise and manage activities responsibly and effectively including self-
 management and HIV/Aids awareness;

 Safety precautions taken into account during performance-based activities in
 order to avoid injuries or incidents.

 Explain his/her rights, human rights, contributions and responsibilities.

 Understanding of the OHS Act
 Learners must be fully aware of all the safety precautions to be taken during
 performance-based activities in order to avoid injuries or incidents. Refer
 specifically to the following tools/machines/equipment:
 • Hand tools
 • Pedestal drill
 1-3 SAFETY • Bench grinder
 12 hours (Generic) • Lathe
 • Milling machine
 • Guillotine
 • Compressors
 • Fire extinguishing apparatus
 • Bending machine
 • Power saws
 • Two and/or four post lift, trolley jack and trestles

 Practical:
 Identify safe and hazardous acts and conditions (e.g. speed of emery wheels,
 Maximum lift on hydraulic equipment, etc.)
 Apply personal hygiene measures.
 Note: Clean workshop on a weekly basis

 42 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 1 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Basic tools and equipment:
 • Spanners: ring-, flat- and combination-
 • Sockets and accessories
 • Pliers: combination, circlip, diagonal, long nose and water pump pliers,
 vice grip
 • Hammers: ball peen, soft face, cross pane, mallet
 • Chisels, hacksaws, scribers, punches
 • Screwdrivers: flat, Phillips/star and off set
 • Allen keys
 • Files, smooth; second cut and bastard: flat-, square-, triangle-, round
 and half round shapes
 • Stocks and dies
 4-5 TOOLS
8 hours (Generic) Identify and explain the functions of the THREE types of drilling machines,
 namely sensitive (pedestal and pillar types), radial and portable drills.

 Application of measuring and marking-off instruments:
 • Steel Rule
 • Square
 • Scriber
 • Tape measure
 • Combination set
 • Punches

 Practical:
 Use the marking-off instruments to mark-off a plate (at least 5mm thick) with
 5 holes.

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 43
 GRADE 10: TERM 1 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Operating principles of 2 and 4 stroke internal combustion engines. (Single
 cylinder spark ignition engines only):
 • Stroke
 6-7 ENGINES
 • Dead centre
8 hours (Generic)
 • Cycle
 Practical: Demonstrate knowledge of the operating principles of the 2 and 4
 stroke internal combustion spark ignition engines
 Identification and function of engine components:
 Pistons, piston rings, crankshaft, connecting rod, bearings, gudgeon pin, camshaft,
 cam and crank gears, valves, valve springs, lifters, flywheel, cylinder head, engine
 block, oil pump, manifolds, carburettor, water pump, gaskets and seals.

 Practical:
 • Identify and describe functions of various engine components of a 2 and 4
 8-9 ENGINES stroke single cylinder spark ignition engine. (Use actual engines)
8 hours (Specific) • Do a comparison between 2 and 4 stroke SI engines regarding operating
 cycle and construction

 Conventional layouts:
 • Engine in front with front- and rear-wheel drives
 • Engine at rear with rear-wheel drive
 • Advantages and disadvantages of each position

 10 REVISION
 11 CONTROL TEST

 GRADE 10: TERM 2 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Calculations on the size of drills and key dimensions:
 • Drill sizes for screw cutting
 • Width, thickness and length of keys

 Practical:
 Apply hand threading with the aid of a the tap and die set

 Semi-permanent joining methods:
 • Bolts
 • Studs
 JOINING • Locking devices
 1-2
 METHODS • Nuts
8 hours
 (Generic) • Split pins
 • Rivets
 • Keys – Identification, fitting and uses of the following types:
 • Parallel key
 • Taper key,
 • Gib-head key
 • Woodruff key
 Practical:
 Produce semi-permanent joints using any two of the following methods: bolts
 and nuts, rivets, studs and split pins on flat bar or sheet metal.

 44 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 2 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Forces:

 Different types of forces found in engineering components:
 • Pulling force (Tensile)
 • Compressive force
 • Shearing force

 Components of forces:
 • Triangle and parallelogram of forces – resultant of two forces only
 • Graphical and mathematical solution of the horizontal and vertical component
 of a single force acting at an angle
 3-6 FORCES
 Moments:
16 hours (Generic)
 Moments found in engineering components (basic calculations):

 Definition:
 Moment = force x perpendicular distance
 (Spanner used to tighten a nut or bolt)

 Stress (Basic calculations on):
 • Square bar
 • Round bar

 Practical:
 Use basic calculations to determine forces, moments and stress

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 45
 GRADE 10: TERM 2 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Properties of lubricants:
 • Viscosity
 • Pour point
 • Flash point

 Grading of oil according to viscosity: (SAE standards)
 • Transmission oil
 • Engine oil
 • Differential oil
 • Cutting fluid
 • Grease

 Friction:
 7-8 MAINTENANCE • Characteristics
8 hours (Generic) • Application

 Define the following types of maintenance:
 • Preventive
 • Predictive
 • Reliability centred maintenance

 Lack of maintenance on equipment
 • Excessive wear
 • Overheating/seizing; and distortion (lack of cooling and lubrication)
 • Failure e.g. hydraulics/pneumatics, controls and cables

 Practical:
 Analyse and predict the outcome of the lack of maintenance on
 equipment used in the workshop.
 MID-YEAR
9 - 11
 EXAMINATION

 46 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 3 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC PRESCRIBED CONTENT
 Characteristics, composition and use of:
 • Ferrous metals and alloys:
  Low carbon steel
  Medium carbon steel
  High carbon steel
  Cast iron:
 • Grey cast iron
 • White cast iron
 1 MATERIALS  Stainless steel (manganese, chrome, vanadium, titanium,
4 hours (Generic) tungsten, molybdenum and cobalt)
 • Non-ferrous elements:

  Copper, tin, lead, zinc, aluminium, nickel
 • Non-ferrous alloys:

  Brass, bronze, phosphor bronze, white metal, duralumin and
 solder
 Practical:
 • Collect a sample of 5 non-ferrous elements and 5 non-ferrous alloys
 • Give 2 uses for each sample collected

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 47
 GRADE 10: TERM 3 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC PRESCRIBED CONTENT
 Function, construction and operation of the single-plate clutch
 assembly:
 • Flywheel
 • Diaphragm pressure plate
 • Clutch Plate (spring and solid disc)
 • Clutch Couplings: Mechanical; Cables, Linkages and Levers
 • Hydraulic; Master and Slave Cylinders, pipes
 • Fault finding

 Identify and investigate the various components of the constant mesh
 manual gearbox and define the construction, function, operation and
 power flow of:
 TERMINOLOGY
 • Gears
 2-4 (Specific)
 • Shafts
12 hours
 • Seals and gaskets
 (DRIVE TRAINS)
 • Synchronising unit
 • Selector Mechanism

 Practical:
 Demonstrate knowledge of the working principle of a multi-speed manual
 gearbox including condition report.

 Function, construction and operation of drive shafts:
 • The Slip Joint
 • Universal Joint
 • Constant Velocity Joint
 • Flexible coupling

 48 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 3 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC PRESCRIBED CONTENT
 Lubrication Systems:
 • Splash feed, Pressure Feed and Full pressure feed
 Oil:
 • Oil purity, oil dilution, Crankcase ventilation
 • Oil Filtration systems: Full-flow and by-pass systems
 Temperature Control:
 • Factors generating heat
 Cooling systems:
 • Direct air
 • Indirect air cooling
 Components:
 5-7 MAINTENANCE • Radiators, Radiator pressure cap, Water pumps, thermostat, by-pass
12 hours (Specific) system
 • Diagnose causes of overheating
 • Pressure test
 • Visual inspection
 Practical:
 • Do a visual inspection on a cooling system
 • Do a pressure test
 Check and maintain all fluid levels:
 • Water
 • Oil
 • Brake fluid
 Basic carburetion:
 • Function of a carburettor
 • Basic principle of operation
 • Idle & choke and high speed circuits
 Air filters: Purpose and types.
 SYSTEMS AND Hydraulic brake system (Layout, function, construction and operation):
 8-9 CONTROL • Master Cylinder (function)
8 hours
 (Specific) • Wheel Cylinders
 • Disc brake assembly
 • Brake shoe assembly
 • Hand brake assembly
 Practical: Replace front brake pads
 10 REVISION
 11 CONTROL TEST

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 49
 GRADE 10: TERM 4 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC PRESCRIBED CONTENT
 Electricity:
 • Electron theory – basic electrical principles:
  Electron movement
  Electrons and conductors
  Pulse with modulation
  Digital and analogue signal
  Effects of electricity
 • Characteristics of magnetism
 • Electromagnets
 SYSTEMS AND • Ohm’s Law
 1-2 • Electrical units and measurements:
 CONTROL
8 hours
 (Specific)  Volts
  Amps
  Ohms
 • Use of the Multi-meter
 • Basics series and parallel circuits
 • Battery – lead acid type

 Practical:
 Demonstrate:
 • Competence in the use of the multi-meter
 • Taking of basic measurements.
 3 REVISION
 4-9 EXAMINATIONS

 50 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 3.2.2 Automotive: Grade 11

 MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY – AUTOMOTIVE

 GRADE 11: TERM 1 – AUTOMOTIVE

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 First Aid:
 • HIV/AIDS Awareness
 • Knowledge of basic First Aid measures

 OHS Act:
 Analyse the OHS Act and regulations where applicable.

 Machine-specific safety measures when dealing with:
 1-3 SAFETY • Grinding machines (portable, bench and surface)
 12 hours (Generic) • Cutting machines (drilling machines, power saw, band saw)
 • Press machines
 • Joining equipment (arc, gas)
 • Handling and storage of gas cylinders
 • Hydraulic operated equipment – hydraulic press

 Practical:
 Perform a first aid exercise to demonstrate action to be taken when a
 fellow learner hurts him/herself in the workshop.
 The principles and functions of the following purpose-made tooling and
 equipment:
 • Stocks and dies (characteristics and drill sizes)
 • Grinding machines (portable, bench)
 • Cutting machines (drilling machines, power saw, horizontal band
 TOOLS saw)
 4-5
 8 hours (Generic) • Guillotine machine (manual and power driven)
 • Press machines

 Practical:
 Explain the safety precautions to be followed when using the various
 cutting and grinding machines.

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 51
 GRADE 11: TERM 1 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 The principles and functions of the following purpose-made tooling and
 equipment:
 • Dial indicators
 • Telescopic gauges
 • Torque wrenches
 6 TOOLS • Outside, Inside micrometres and vernier calliper (simple readings from
4 hours (Specific) the instruments, use of attachments)
 Practical:
 • Demonstrate the competent use of the specific tools above with the
 measuring of various engine components to determine wear etc. (e.g.
 bore, piston and crankshaft)
 • Tighten bolts to the correct torque in the correct sequence (cylinder
 head)
 C.I. Engines:
 Combustion chamber designs for direct and indirect injection
 Injector:
 Function, construction, operation and types of nozzles
 Valve assemblies:

 • Identify various overhead valve arrangements
 • Identify various camshafts arrangements: SOHC (single) and DOHC
 (double)
 • Cam followers – mechanical and hydraulic
 7-9 ENGINES • Valve timing diagram – necessity for lead, lag and overlap
12 hours (Specific) • Continuously variable valve timing (CVVT) system
 • Purpose and importance of valve clearance
 • Timing gears, chains, belt drives and tensioners

 Practical:
 • Research the CVVT systems used by any 4 various manufacturers of
 motor vehicles
 • Use a practical method and determine the valve timing of a four cylinder
 four stroke engine (with or without marks). Record findings

 10 REVISION
 11 TEST

 52 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 11: TERM 2 - AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Function and operation of the following equipment used during
 the manufacturing of steel:
 • Blast furnace
 • Open-hearth furnace
 • Bessemer converter
 • Electric arc furnace
 • Rotor plant

 1-4 MATERIALS Distinguish between the following properties of engineering
16 hours (Generic) materials:
 • Hardness
 • Plasticity
 • Elasticity
 • Ductility
 • Malleability
 • Brittleness
 • Toughness

 GRADE 11: TERM 2 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Basic function, construction and operation of final drives:
 • Spiral bevel type
 • Hypoid type
 • Conventional differential
 • Limited slip differential

 Practical:
 • Use an actual differential in the workshop and explain the power
 SYSTEMS AND flow under different simulated conditions and record findings
 5-8 CONTROL
16 hours (Specific) Identify the layout and purpose of different drive systems:
 • Four-wheel drive
 • All-wheel drive

 Hydraulic brakes:
 • Master Cylinder (Parts & Operation)
 • Vacuum servo unit (purpose and operation)
 • ABS braking system (basic lay-out and operation)
 Practical:
 • Investigate a master cylinder and compile condition report

 9 - 11 EXAMINATION

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 53
 GRADE 11: TERM 3 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Define the difference in construction between:
 • Front axles
 • Rear axles:
  Semi-floating and,
  Full-floating
 Steering systems, layout and operation:
 • Types of steering boxes (Rack and pinion gearing and worm gearing)
 • Power steering
 • Electric power steering

 Identify and state the function and purpose of the following steering control
 components:
 • Drag links
 • Tie rod ends
 • Ball joints

 Suspension layout and operation:
 • Define sprung and un-sprung mass
 • Semi-elliptic leaf springs
 SYSTEM AND • Coil springs
 1-5
20 hours
 CONTROL • Torsion bars
 (Specific) • Control
  Telescopic shock absorbers (gas and hydraulic)
  Anti-roll bars
  Stabilisers

 ELECTRICITY

 Identify the functions and describe the operation of the conventional ignition
 system with reference to:
 • Firing order
 • Ignition timing
 • Spark plugs
 • Purpose of mechanical and vacuum regulators

 Starting circuit:
 Show an understanding of the basic starting circuit

 Supplemental systems (purpose and operation):
 • Traction control
 • Air bag control

 54 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 11: TERM 3 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC PRESCRIBED CONTENT
 Identify causes of malfunction of pedestal drill, power saw and pedestal
 grinder:
 • Lack of lubrication or incorrect lubrication
 6 MAINTENANCE • Overloading
4 hours (Generic) • Friction
 Practical:
 Analyse and predict the outcome of the lack of maintenance on
 equipment used in the workshop.
 ENGINE LUBRICATION
 Oil pumps (purpose and operation):
 • Gear
 • Vane
 • Rotor

 Demonstrate an understanding of oil control methods referring to:
 7 MAINTENANCE
 • Oil filtration systems
4 hours (Specific)
 • Pressure relief valve
 • Seals
 Servicing of vehicles:
 • Importance of regular servicing
 Practical:
 • Describe the basic process to follow when performing a major
 service
 Automotive calculations and application:
 • Work
 • Power
 8-9 FORCES • Torque
8 hours (Specific) • Compression Ratio
 Practical:
 Use basic specifications from a given engine to determine the theoretical
 power (IP) and compression ratio (CR)
 10 Revision
 11 Control Test

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 55
 GRADE 11: TERM 4 – AUTOMOTIVE

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT

 • Workshop administration:
 1-2 TERMINOLOGY  Read and interpret job instructions
 8 hours (Specific)
  Read, interpret and adhere to Manufacturers’ Specifications

 3-4 REVISION
 5-9 EXAMINATIONS

3.2.3 Automotive: Grade 12

 MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY – AUTOMOTIVE

 GRADE 12 – TERM 1

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 HIV/AIDS Awareness

 Knowledge of basic First Aid measures

 Analyse the OHS Act and regulations where applicable to the following
 machines:

 • Grinding machines (portable, bench and surface)
 • Cutting (drilling machines, power saw, band saw)
 • Shearing machines (manual and power driven)
 • Press machines
 • Joining (arc, gas)
 1-3 SAFETY
 • Handling and usage of gas cylinders
 12 hours (Generic)
 Knowledge and application of basic workshop layouts:
 • Process layout
 • Product layout

 Referring to the OHS Act analyse the responsibilities of the:
 • Employer
 • Employee

 Practical:
 Compare the process and product layout of TWO different manufacturing or
 maintenance workshops

 56 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 12: TERM 1 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Identification and application of diagnostic equipment:

 • Compression tester
 • Cylinder leakage tester
 • Gas analyser (all crankcase gases)
 4-6 TOOLS
 • Computerised diagnostic scanner
12 hours (Specific)
 • Wheel balancer
 • Wheel alignment equipment (bubble gauge and turn tables)
 Practical:
 Use any 2 of the diagnostic equipment mentioned above to simulate a real-life
 situation
 Crankshafts:
 • Balancing of crankshafts
 • Vibration damper (function and assembly)
 • Cylinder layouts
 • Crank arrangements
 • Firing orders
 7-9 ENGINES
12 hours (Specific) Describe the operating principles and construction of:
 • Turbochargers
 • Super chargers

 Practical:
 Compare and identify different crankshafts layouts and match to the
 different cylinder blocks
 10 REVISION
 CONTROL
 11
 TEST

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 57
 GRADE 12: TERM 2 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Identify materials by:
 • Sound test
 • Bending test
 • Filing test
 • Machining test

 Methods of enhancing the properties of steel (only heated
 temperature and cooling apply):

 • Tempering
 1-2 MATERIALS
 • Case hardening
8 hours (Generic)
 • Hardening
 • Annealing
 • Normalising

 Practical:
 Test TWO different materials using the:
 • Sound test
 • Bending test
 • Filing test
 • Machining test
 Application of the following automotive calculations:
 • Work, Power, Torque, Compression Ratio
 • Indicated Power, Brake Power, Mechanical Efficiency

 Practical:
 3-4 FORCES
 • Measure stroke
8 hours (Specific)
 • Measure cylinder bore
 • Measure combustion chamber volume

 Use specifications and measurements obtained from a given engine
 and calculate the Indicated power

 58 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 12: TERM 2 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Diagnose faults by using and reading test equipment:
 • Gas analysing
 • Compression test
 MAINTENANCE • Cylinder leakage
 5-6
8 hours (Specific) • Pressure test

 Practical:
 Use abovementioned equipment to diagnose faults on an engine

 Describe the operational purpose and functions of the automatic
 gearbox:
 • Torque converters
 SYSTEMS AND • Epicyclical gear trains
 CONTROL • Brake bands/locking devices
 7-8
8 hours
 (Specific) • Control body (purpose only)
 • Gear Ratios
 (DRIVE TRAINS)
 Practical:
 • Explain the power flow through the torque convertor
 • Identify various main components of the automatic gearbox

9 - 11 EXAMINATION

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 59
 GRADE 12: TERM 3 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC PRESCRIBED CONTENT
 Steering Geometry:
 • Alignment to manufacturers specifications
 • Toe-in and toe-out
 • Castor and camber
 • Kingpin inclination
 • Ackermann principle (toe-out on turns)
 Practical:
 Use testing equipment and demonstrate competency to test and adjust
 various wheel alignment angles to specifications:
 • Toe-in and toe-out
 • Castor and camber
 Application of wheel balancing:
 • Static
 • Dynamic
 SYSTEM AND Practical:
 1-6 CONTROL Use a wheel balancer and demonstrate competency to balance a wheel
24 hours
 (Specific)
 ELECTRICITY:
 Purpose and operation of engine management:
 • Petrol
 • Diesel
 • Catalytic converter
 • Speed Control systems (Theory only)
 • Charging systems (Alternator)
 Practical:
 Use a diagnostic scanner on an engine to test various systems
 Electrical fuel pump (Theory):
 • Purpose and operation
 • Pressure control (basic)
 Practical:
 Test fuel pump pressure
7 - 11 EXAMINATIONS

 60 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 12: TERM 4 – AUTOMOTIVE

WEEK TOPIC PRESCRIBED CONTENT
1-3 REVISION
4-9 EXAMINATIONS

 WELDING AND METALWORK
 PROGRESSION
 GRADE 10 GRADE 11 GRADE 12

 • Safety
 (HIV/Aids Awareness)
 • Tools
 Hand tools
 Measuring tools
 • Materials • Safety
 Characteristics and uses Basic first Aid HIV/Aids Awareness
 • Forces OHS act • Safety
 Types of forces Machine-specific safety measures First Aid HIV/Aids Awareness
 GENERIC

 Basic calculations • Tools OHS act
 • Maintenance Purpose made tooling and equipment Machine-specific safety
 Properties of lubricants • Materials measures
 Friction Equipment used during manufacturing • Materials
 Lack of maintenance of steel Properties and Uses
 • Joining Methods Properties of engineering materials Methods of enhancing the
 Calculations on drill and key • Maintenance properties of steel
 sizes Malfunction of power tools due to lack
 Semi-permanent joining of maintenance
 methods
 • Engines
 Operating principles of 2 and
 4 stroke internal combustion
 engines
 • Tools
 • Tools
 Purpose-made tooling and equipment
 Purpose-made tooling and
 • Terminology
 equipment
 Use of templates
 • Terminology
 Roof trusses
 Templates
 Terms and definitions
 • Terminology Calculations sheet metal
 Welding symbols
 SPECIALISATION

 Welding terms Welding symbols application
 Developments
 Welding symbols Developments
 Steel sections
 Welding joints • Forces
 • Forces
 Developments Forces and moments
 Effects of forces moments and
 Templates Steel frameworks
 torques
 Principles and functions of Stress and strain
 System of forces
 welding machines • Maintenance
 Moments, Stress and strain
 Electrical aspects regarding Maintenance on various
 • Maintenance
 arc welding and gas welding operating systems
 Malfunction of power tools
 • Joining Methods
 • Joining Methods
 Inspection of welds
 Joining processes, gas arc and MIG
 Destructive tests
 Spot welding
 Non-destructive tests
 Welding defects, causes and
 Distortion and stresses
 remedies
 Effect of temperature
 Heat treatment of steel

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 61
 3.3 Content outline per term: Welding and Metalwork

3.3.1 Welding and Metalwork: Grade 10

 MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY: WELDING AND METALWORK

 GRADE 10: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Organise and manage activities responsibly and effectively, including self-
 management and HIV/Aids awareness.

 Safety precautions taken into account during performance-based activities
 in order to avoid injuries or incidents.

 Explain his/her rights, human rights, contributions and responsibilities.

 Understanding of the OHS Act
 Learners must be fully aware of all the safety precautions to be taken
 during performance-based activities, in order to avoid injuries or incidents.
 Refer specifically to the following tools/machines/equipment:
 • Hand tools
 • Pedestal drill
 • Bench grinder
 1-3 SAFETY
 • Lathe
 12 hours (Generic)
 • Milling machine
 • Guillotine
 • Compressors
 • Fire extinguishing apparatus
 • Bending machine
 • Power saws
 • Two and/or four post lift, trolley jack and trestles

 Practical:
 Identify safe and hazardous acts and conditions (e.g. speed of emery
 wheels, Maximum lift on hydraulic equipment, etc.)

 Apply personal hygiene measures.
 Note: Clean workshop on a weekly basis.

 62 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 WELDING TERMS
 Explain the following terms with the aid of sketches:
 • Arc • Tack welding
 • Arc length • Throat thickness
 • Leg length • Toe of weld
 • Included angle • Weld face
 • Parent metal • Weld junction
 • Penetration • Weld bead
 • Reinforcement • Weld decay
 • Root • Welding voltage
 TERMINOLOGY • Root face • Welding current
 4-6
12 hours (Specific) • Root run • Welding heat
 • Run
 Practical:
 Explain the welding terms by means of sketches
 TEMPLATES

 • Materials used for template: wood, cardboard, steel and hardboard
 • Principle of simple setting-out of the right angle and the application
 of Pythagoras’ theory
 Practical:
 Do calculations on the theorem of Pythagoras and apply the principle by
 setting a right angled project.

 GRADE 10: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 PRINCIPLES AND FUNCTIONS OF

 • Arc welding machines such as AC and DC
 • Arc welding accessories

 ELECTRICAL ASPECTS REGARDING ARC WELDING
 4-6 TERMINOLOGY
 Explain the following:
12 hours (Specific)
 • Volts • Alternating current
 • Current (Ampere) • Earthing
 • Resistance • Single phase
 • Polarity • Three phase
 • Arc voltage • Voltage drop
 • Direct current

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 63
 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 PRINCIPLES AND FUNCTIONS OF
 • Gas welding (oxy-acetylene)
 • Oxy-acetylene welding accessories
 • Assembly of oxy-acetylene equipment
 4-6 TERMINOLOGY • Setting of flames
 Practical:
12 hours (Specific)
 Demonstrate an understanding of oxy-acetylene equipment by
 assembling the equipment in the correct sequence.
 Demonstrate an understanding of different types of flames by setting
 flames for heating, cutting and welding.

 GRADE 10: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

 Basic tools and equipment:
 • Spanners: ring-, flat- and combination-
 • Sockets and accessories
 • Pliers: combination, circlip, diagonal, long nose and water pump
 pliers, vice grip
 • Hammers: ball peen, soft face, cross pane, mallet
 • Chisels, hacksaws, scribers, punches
 • Screwdrivers: flat, Phillips/star and offset
 • Allen keys
 • Files, smooth; second cut and bastard: flat-, square-, triangle-,
 round and half round shapes
 • Stocks and dies

 8-9 TOOLS Identify and explain the functions of the THREE types of drilling
8 hours (Generic) machines, namely sensitive (pedestal and pillar types), radial and
 portable drills

 Application of measuring and marking-off instruments:
 • Steel Rule
 • Square
 • Scriber
 • Tape measure
 • Combination set
 • Punches

 Practical:
 Use the marking-off instruments to mark-off a plate (at least 5mm
 thick) with 5 holes.
 10 REVISION
4 hours
 11 CONTROL TEST
4 hours

 64 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Basic calculations on the size of drills and keyway sizes:
 • Drill sizes for screw cutting
 • Width, thickness of keyways

 Application of hand threading with the aid of the tap and die set

 Semi-permanent joining methods:
 • Bolts
 • Studs
 • Locking devices
 • Nuts
 1-2 JOINING METHODS
 • Split pins
8 hours (Generic)
 • Rivets
 Keyway identification, fitting and uses of:
 • Parallel keys
 • Taper keys
 • Gib head keys
 • Woodruff keys

 Practical:
 Use the marking-off plate from Topic “Tools” and drill and tap two
 (2) holes.

 GRADE 10: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Forces:

 Different types of forces found in engineering components:

 • Pulling force (Tensile)
 • Compressive force
 • Shearing force
 Components of forces:

 • Triangle and parallelogram of forces – resultant of two forces only
 • Graphical and mathematical solution of the horizontal and vertical
 component of a single force acting at an angle
 3-6 FORCES
16 hours (Generic) Moments:

 Moments found in engineering components (basic calculations):

 Definition:
 Moment = force x perpendicular distance
 (Spanner used to tighten a nut or bolt)

 Stress (Basic calculations on):
 • Square bar
 • Round bar

 Practical:
 Use basic calculations to determine forces, moments and stress.

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 65
 GRADE 10: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Properties of lubricants:
 • Viscosity
 • Pour point
 • Flash point

 Grading of oil according to viscosity: (SAE standards)

 • Transmission oil
 • Engine oil
 • Differential oil
 • Cutting fluid
 • Grease

 Friction:
 • Characteristics
 7-8 MAINTENANCE • Application
8 hours (Generic)
 Define the following types of maintenance:
 • Preventive
 • Predictive
 • Reliability centred maintenance

 Identify the outcome of the lack of maintenance on equipment used in
 the workshop:
 • Excessive wear
 • Overheating/seizing; and distortion (lack of cooling and lubrication)
 • Failure e.g. hydraulics/pneumatics, controls and cables

 Disadvantages of an unbalanced work piece or machine part

 Practical:
 Analyse and predict the outcome of the lack of maintenance on equipment
 used in the workshop
 MID-YEAR
9 - 11
 EXAMINATION

 66 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 10: TERM 3 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Identifying the different WELDING SYMBOLS:

 • Elements of welding symbols

 Theory and Application of PERMANENT JOINTS (Arc welding):

 • Lap joint
 • Butt joint
 TERMINOLOGY • T-joint
 1-5 • Edge
 WELDING SYMBOLS • Corner
20 hours
 AND JOINTS
 (Specific) Practical:

 Apply the identified welding symbols by welding different types of joints
 using oxy-acetylene and arc-welding.

 Theory and Application of PERMANENT JOINTS (Oxy-acetylene):

 • Edge
 • Corner

 GRADE 10: TERM 3 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Development of:
 • Elbows with one joint only
 • Right angled and oblique T pieces of equal and unequal diameter
 pipes, including shapes of holes. All branches to be on centre of
 TERMINOLOGY the main pipe
 6-9 • Right cones with top and base parallel to the horizontal plane
16 hours DEVELOPMENTS
 (Specific) Practical:
 Demonstrate an understanding of developments by developing/
 producing models from the drawings of right angled and oblique
 T-pieces of equal and unequal diameters, and the right cones
 with the top and base parallel to the horizontal
 10 REVISION
 11 TEST

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 67
 GRADE 10: TERM 4 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Characteristics, composition and use of:
 • Ferrous metals and alloys:
 • Low, medium and high carbon steel
 • Cast iron, grey cast iron, white cast iron

  Stainless steel (manganese, chrome, vanadium, titanium,
 tungsten, molybdenum and cobalt)
 • Non-ferrous elements:
 1-2 MATERIALS
  Copper, tin, lead, zinc, aluminium, nickel
8 hours (Generic)
 • Non-ferrous alloys:

  Brass, bronze, phosphor bronze, white metal, duralumin and
 solder
 Practical:
 • Collect a sample of 5 non-ferrous elements and 5 non-ferrous
 alloys
 • Give 2 uses for each sample collected
 Operating principles of 2 and 4 stroke internal combustion engines. (Single
 cylinder spark ignition engines only):
 • Stroke
 3-4 ENGINES
 • Dead centre
8 hours (Generic)
 • Cycle
 Practical: Demonstrate knowledge of the operating principles of the 2 and 4
 stroke internal combustion spark ignition engines
 5 REVISION
 6-9 FINAL EXAMINATION

 68 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 3.3.2 Welding and Metalwork: Grade 11

 WELDING AND METALWORK

 GRADE 11: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT

 HIV/AIDS Awareness

 Knowledge of basic First Aid measures

 Analyse the OHS Act and regulations where applicable

 Machine-specific safety measures when dealing with:
 1-3 SAFETY
 12 hours (Generic) • Grinding machines (portable, bench and surface)
 • Cutting machines (drilling machines, power saw, band saw)
 • Press machines
 • Joining equipment (arc, gas)
 • Handling and storage of gas cylinders
 • Hydraulic operated equipment – hydraulic press

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 69
 GRADE 11: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 The use of TEMPLATES:
 • Materials used for templates: wood, cardboard, steel plate and
 hardboard
 • Principle of simple setting out of the right angle and the application
 of Pythagoras’ theorem, the ratio of 45° and 60° right angled
 triangles. Use principles 3, 4 and 5
 • Standard cross centres and benchmarks
 • Transference of floor diagrams to templates
 • Use of strip, flange and web templates for steel sections. Ordinary
 and bushed steel templates
 • Use of coloured and lettered holes, instructions and conventional
 marks on templates
 The application of ROOF TRUSSES:
 Calculations of:
 • Rise
 • Slope
 • Pitch
 The layout of roof trusses, details of purlins, truss shoes, wall plates,
 expansion and footing.
 -6 TERMINOLOGY Practical:
12 hours (Specific) Develop a roof truss using the given instructions and templates and by
 applying the theorem of Pythagoras.
 CALCULATION OF COSTS:
 • Quantification from drawings
 • Compiling of cutting lists
 • Calculation of cost of roof trusses and lattice beams
 EXPLAIN THE FOLLOWING TERMS:
 • Deposited metal
 • Fusion zone
 • Gap
 • Heat effected zone
 • Kerf
 • Spatter
 • Weld metal
 • Weld pool
 • Welding sequence
 WELDING SYMBOLS:
 • Fusion weld symbols
 • Supplementary symbols

 70 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 11: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 The principles and functions of the following purpose-made tooling and
 equipment:

 • Stocks and dies (characteristics and drill sizes)
 • Grinding machines (portable, bench)
 • Cutting machines (drilling machines, power saw, horizontal band
 saw)
 • Guillotine machine (manual and power driven)
 • Press machines
 7-9 TOOLS
 • Joining equipment (arc, spot, gas)
12 hours (Specific)
 • Rolling machine
 • Punch and cropper machine
 • Plasma cutter
 • Cut-off machine

 Practical:
 Demonstrate the use and care of purpose-made tooling and equipment
 when producing a product and when doing maintenance.

 10 REVISION
 11 CONTROL TEST

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 71
 GRADE 11: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 FORCES:
 Effects of forces, moments and torques on engineering components
 applying design principles.
 Forces found in engineering components.
 Determine graphically.

 SYSTEM OF FORCES (Bow’s notation)
 • Triangle of forces
 • Polygon of forces
 • Resultant and equilibrant
 Practical:
 Determine graphically the magnitude of forces found in engineering
 components using triangle of forces, polygon of forces and resultant
 forces.
 Moments:
 Moments found in engineering components. (By calculation only):
 1-3 FORCES Law of moments:
12 hours (Specific) Sum of LHM = Sum of RHM
 A supported beam with two vertical point loads acting on the beam with
 two supports.
 The calculation of shear force and bending moment diagram and
 graphically illustrated.
 Practical:
 Do calculations on moments of forces found in engineering components.
 STRESS AND STRAIN (Calculation of):
 • Stress and strain (Hooke’s law)
 • Compressive/tensile stresses
 • Young’s modulus of elasticity (ignore factor of safety)
 • Determine change in length (Δl)
 • Stress/strain diagram
 Practical:
 Do calculations on stress and strain as indicated.

 GRADE 11: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Identify causes of malfunction of pedestal drill, power saw and pedestal
 grinder:
 • Lack of lubrication or incorrect lubrication
 • Overloading
 4 MAINTENANCE • Friction
4 hours (Generic)
 Practical:
 Analyse and predict the outcome of the lack of maintenance on
 equipment used in the workshop.

 72 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Refer to manufacturers’ manual.

 Identify causes of malfunction of guillotine, roller, punch and shearing
 machine:
 • Lack of lubrication or incorrect lubrication
 5 MAINTENANCE • Overloading
4 hours (Specific) • Friction

 Practical:
 Identify causes of malfunctioning of guillotines, roller, punch and shearing
 machines and demonstrate sufficient knowledge to apply the necessary
 preventive measures.

 GRADE 11: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Identify the applications and uses of the following processes:
 • Gas welding (oxy-acetylene)
 • Arc welding
 • MIG welding
 Practical:
 Apply the theoretical knowledge in performing welding processes to produce a
 project using oxy-acetylene, arc-welding and MIG/MAGS welding
 Apply the welding process to CARBON STEEL:
 • The heating and cooling cycle
 • To control the hardness
 • Preheating and tempering
 • Factors reducing hardness
 • Factors increasing hardness
 ARC WELDING:
 • Sequence and direction of welding
 • Pre-setting to control warping and distortion, its causes and prevention
 • Shrinkage in welded joints and the influence of the welding order on
 shrinkage and stress in welds in order to prevent distortion
 JOINING The use and application of SPOT (Resistance) WELDING:
 6-8 METHODS • Description of process
12 hours
 (Specific) • Current
 • Electrodes
 • Size of tips
 • Time cycle
 • Maintenance and care of electrodes tips
 Practical:
 Produce a project using spot welding, taking into consideration the size of the
 plate thickness, size of tips and maintenance of tips.
 Identify defects in welds, the causes and remedies for:
 • Blowholes
 • Porosity
 • Incomplete penetration
 • Undercutting
 • Weld craters
 • Restarts
 • Slag inclusion
 • Cracks
 Practical:
 Identify defects from different welds, the causes and remedies.

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 73
 GRADE 11: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

 HEAT TREATMENT OF STEEL:

 • The change in the structure of carbon steel during heating and
 cooling processes

 • The iron – carbon equilibrium diagram:

  The temperature range of 500 - 900 ˚C
  Carbon content between 0% and 1.4%

 • Description of the purpose and methods for the following:
 5-8 JOINING METHODS
  Annealing
16 hours (Specific)  Normalizing
  Hardening
  Tempering
  Case hardening

 Practical:
 • Apply knowledge of heat treatment in performing tempering
 process on a cutting tool.
 • Apply knowledge of heat treatment in performing normalising
 process on a tempered cutting tool.

 MID-YEAR
 9 - 11
 EXAMINATION

 GRADE 11: TERM 3 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 MATERIALS
 (Generic)

 Describe the use of the following plants in the manufacturing of steel:

 • Blast furnace
 • Open-hearth furnace
 • Bessemer converter
 • Electric arc furnace
 1-4 • Rotor plant
16 hours
 Identify the following properties of engineering materials:

 • Hardness
 • Plasticity
 • Elasticity
 • Ductility
 • Malleability
 • Brittleness
 • Toughness

 74 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 11: TERM 3 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Development of:

 • Transformations between parallel horizontal planes:
  square to square
  square to round
 TERMINOLOGY  rectangular to round
 5-9  cones on and off centres
20 hours DEVELOPMENTS
 (Specific) • Oblique cones with top and base parallel to the horizontal plane
 • Right cylindrical Y-connections

 Practical:
 Apply the knowledge gained on developments to produce TWO
 transformations between parallel horizontal planes and a right cylindrical
 Y-connection.
 10 REVISION
 11 CONTROL TEST

 GRADE 11: TERM 4 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT

 Knowledge of steel sections such as:

 • Angle sections
 • Channel sections
 TERMINOLOGY • I-beam sections
 1-3 Referring to:
12 hours Sections
 (Specific) • Identification of the profile of the sections
 • Uses of different sections
 • Joining of the different sections
 Practical:
 Identify different types of steel sections as used in steel structures
 around the school or nearby buildings
 4-5 REVISION
 6 - 11 EXAMINATION

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 75
 3.3.3 Welding and Metalwork: Grade 12

 WELDING AND METALWORK

 GRADE 12: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 HIV/AIDS Awareness

 Knowledge of basic First Aid measures

 Analyse the OHS Act and regulations where applicable to the following
 machines:
 • Grinding machines (portable, bench and surface)
 • Cutting (drilling machines, power saw, band saw)
 • Shearing machines (manual and power driven)
 • Press machines
 • Joining (arc, gas)
 1-3 SAFETY • Handling and usage of gas cylinders
 12 hours (Generic)
 Knowledge and application of basic workshop layouts:
 • Process layout
 • Product layout

 Referring to the OHS Act analyse the responsibilities of the:
 • Employer
 • Employee

 Practical:
 Compare the process and product layout of TWO different manufacturing
 or maintenance workshops

 GRADE 12: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Templates:
 • Marking off templates, full or part
 • Sets of roof trusses, beams, lattice girders and plate girders
 • Method of obtaining and transferring dimensions
 Calculations of sheet metal for rolling and bending:
 • Rolled plate
 3-5 TERMINOLOGY
 • Rectangular and square plate
 12 hours (Specific) Practical:
 Do calculations on rolling and bending plates.
 Application of WELDING SYMBOLS:
 All the welding symbols according to the Code of Practice for welding – SANS
 Practical:
 Apply the welding symbols as indicated on a given sketch according to
 SANS to produce a project from a template.

 76 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 The principles and functions of the following purpose-made tooling and
 equipment:
 • Stocks and dies (characteristics and drill sizes)
 • Grinding machines (portable, bench)
 • Cutting machines (drilling machines, power saw, horizontal band saw)
 • Guillotine machine (manual and power driven)
 • Press machines
 • Joining equipment (arc, spot, gas)
 TOOLS • Rolling machine
 6-7
8 hours (Specific) • Punch and cropper machine
 • Plasma cutter
 • Brinell and Rockwell hardness testers
 • Moments and forces testers
 • Tensile testers
 • MIG/MAG welders
 Practical:
 Display an understanding of the use and care of purpose-made tooling and
 equipment when producing a product and doing maintenance.

 GRADE 12: TERM 1 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 Identify materials by:
 • Sound test
 • Bending test
 • Filing test and
 • Machining test

 Practical:
 Identify material types by using sound, bending, filing and machining tests.

 Methods of enhancing the properties of steel (only heated temperature
 8-9 MATERIALS and cooling apply):
8 hours (Generic) • Tempering
 • Case hardening
 • Hardening
 • Annealing
 • Normalising

 Practical:
 Do enhancement on materials by applying tempering on cutting tools and
 hardening soft carbon steel.

 10 REVISION
 11 CONTROL TEST

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 77
 GRADE 12: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 FORCES AND MOMENTS:
 Effects of forces and moments on engineering components applying
 design principles:
 STEEL FRAMEWORKS:
 Determine graphically the magnitude and nature of forces on the
 members of frameworks with a maximum of 11 (eleven) parts. (Only
 parallel and vertical loads.) Calculate the reactions.
 Basic calculations on:
 • Moments found in engineering components: (By calculation only)
 • A simply supported beam with two vertical point loads and one
 uniformly distributed load (UDL) acting on the beam (including
 reactions at the supports)
 • A simply supported beam with THREE vertical point loads and
 without uniformly distributed load (UDL) acting on the beam
 • Calculate the reactions at the supports
 • Calculate the bending moments at each and shear forces between
 1-4 FORCES points
16 hours (Specific) Draw the following diagrams to scale:
 • Space diagram
 • Bending moment diagram
 • Shear force diagram
 Practical:
 Do calculations of moments and, using a bending moment tester,
 perform a bending moment test on a beam.
 STRESS AND STRAIN (Calculation of):
 • Stress and strain (Hooke’s law)
 • Compressive/tensile stresses
 • Young’s modulus of elasticity (include the factor of safety)
 • Determine change in length (Δl)
 • Stress/strain diagram
 Practical:
 Do calculations on stress and strain whilst taking into consideration
 Young’s modulus for each material.

 78 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 12: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 INSPECTION OF WELDS (Inspection during and after completion of
 oxy-acetylene and arc welding):

 • Clean bead
 • Constant width and height of bead
 • Fusion and penetration
 • Presence of pits
 • Undercutting
 • Distortion
 • Cracks
 • Spatter
 • Slag inclusion
 • Start and termination of weld
 • Correct flame
 • Pressure
 5-8 JOINING METHODS • Current
16 hours (Specific) Application of destructive tests on welded joints:
 • Nick break
 • Nick bend
 • Machinability tests

 Practical:
 Perform destructive tests on a welded joint using nick break, nick bend and
 machinability test to identify defects.

 Describe and compare the following non-destructive tests:
 • Visual inspection
 • X-rays
 • Dye penetration
 • Ultrasonic test

 Practical:
 Perform the above non-destructive tests on a welded joint to identify defects.

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 79
 GRADE 12: TERM 2 – WELDING AND METALWORK

 Stresses and distortion in welding and stress relieving:
 • Shrinkage Of Welded Joint:
  Definition of shrinkage
  Transverse shrinkage causing distortion
  Longitudinal shrinkage causing distortion
  Thickness shrinkage causing distortion
  The effect of the type of electrode with which it is welded
  The effect of the size of the welding current
  The effect of speed with which it is welded
  The effect of the rate of cooling while welding and after welding

 • Identify the factors affecting distortion and residual stress
 JOINING METHODS •
 (Specific) • Methods to prevent or reduce distortion and stress
 •
 • Identify and apply stress relieving heat treatment processes
 •
 • Describe the effect of change in temperature on steel:
  The effect of cold and hot working on the crystal structure
  The application of the iron-carbon equilibrium diagram on steel
 in respect of heat treatment and welding
  The effect of fast cooling on the structure and properties of
 steel

 Practical:
 Identify the factors that lead to distortion and residual stresses within a
 welded joint.
 MID-YEAR
9 - 11
 EXAMINATION

 80 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 12: TERM 3 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 MAINTENANCE
 (Specific)

 Refer to manufacturers’ manual.

 Suitable preventative maintenance in operating systems for guillotine, pedestal drill, power saw, roller,
 punch and shearing machine and pedestal grinder.
 1-2 Identify causes of malfunction of:
8 hours
 • Lack of lubrication or incorrect lubrication
 • Overloading
 • Friction

 Practical:
 Perform periodic maintenance as prescribed by manufacturers on specific machines.

 Development of:

 Marking-off templates, by calculation only, of the following between
 horizontal parallel planes:
 TERMINOLOGY
 3-8 • A cone frustum of slight taper
24 hours DEVELOPMENTS • Square to round transformers (on centre only)
 (Specific) • Hoppers with square or rectangular openings (on and off centre)

 Practical:
 Do calculations on cone frustum, square to round transition and hoppers.
 9 - 11 TRIAL EXAMINATION

 GRADE 12: TERM 4 – WELDING AND METALWORK

WEEK TOPIC CONTENT
 1-3 REVISION
 4-9 EXAMINATION

CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 81
 SECTION 4
 ASSESSMENT

4.1 INTRODUCTION

Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the performance
of learners, using various forms of assessment. It involves four steps: generating and collecting evidence of achievement;
evaluating this evidence; recording the findings; and using this information to understand and thereby assist the learner’s
development in order to improve the process of learning and teaching.

Assessment involves activities that are undertaken throughout the year. In Grades 10 - 12 assessment should be both
informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning). In both cases regular feedback should be
provided to learners to enhance the learning experience.

Evidence of all assessments including tests, simulations and tasks should be placed in the learner’s script. It is
imperative that all items are marked clearly. Items that are loose should be pasted into the script to become a
permanent part of a learner’s record.

All items in the learner script must contain the following references:

• Date

• Topic

• Homework assignments including a textbook page and exercise reference

• Evidence of scrutiny and interaction from the teacher in red pen

• All teacher actions/interventions in the script should be dated

• Learners are required to mark all self-assessments in pencil and all corrections must be shown in pencil.

As the script is a formal assessment document, the learner is required to cover and keep the script neat and
clean. The teacher is required to provide guidance in this respect.

Apart from the learner script, no additional file or portfolio is required.

4.2 INFORMAL OR DAILY ASSESSMENT (ASSESSMENT FOR LEARNING)

Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on learners’ achievements that can be
used to improve their learning.

Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations, discussions,
practical demonstrations, learner-teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, etc. Informal assessment may
be as simple as stopping during the lesson to observe learners or to discuss with learners how learning is progressing.
Informal assessment should be used to provide feedback to the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but need
not be recorded. It should not be seen as separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom. Learners or
teachers can mark these assessment tasks.

Self-assessment and peer assessment actively involve learners in assessment. This is important as it allows learners
to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily assessment tasks are not formally
recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. In such instances, a simple checklist may be used to record this assessment.
However, teachers may use the learners’ performance in these assessment tasks to provide verbal or written feedback
to learners, the school management team and parents. This is particularly important if barriers to learning or poor levels
of participation are encountered. The results of daily assessment tasks are not taken into account for promotion and
certification purposes.

 82 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 The following outline provides teachers with informal programmes for assessment that may be followed in order to
achieve effective curriculum delivery.

Informal assessment tasks do not contribute towards promotion and progression of the learner. Its sole intention is the
development of knowledge and skills in preparation of formal assessment.

 ASSESSMENT TASKS TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4

Tests (class, theory and revision tests) 1 1 1 Consolidation
Assignment 1 1 1 0
Class work / case studies / work sheets Weekly Weekly Weekly Consolidation
Homework (theory and practical) Weekly Weekly Weekly Consolidation
Workshop / practical Weekly Weekly Weekly 0

Evidence of informal assessment will be found in the learner’s script. The nature of these tasks is described under
assessment for learning.

4.3 FORMAL ASSESSMENT (ASSESSMENT OF LEARNING)

4.3.1 Formal assessment requirements

All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as formal assessment.
Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and certification purposes.
All formal assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance and to ensure that proper
standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a
grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include projects, oral presentations, demonstrations,
performances, tests, examinations, practical tasks, etc. Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal
Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject.

 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT
 School-based Assessment - SBA Practical Assessment Task - PAT Final Examination

 25% 25% 50%

The formal assessment requirements for Mechanical Technology are as follows:

• School-based Assessment (SBA): SBA, which is written at the end of term 1, 2 and 3, shows the learner’s
 progress throughout the year and accounts for 25% of the learner’s promotion mark.

• In Grades 10 and 11 all SBA is set and moderated internally.

• In Grade 12 the formal assessment (25%) is internally set and marked but externally moderated.

• Practical Assessment Task (PAT): PAT accounts for the skills the learner has mastered. This is assessed at
 intervals and requires the learner to engage in multiple practical sessions. During these weekly sessions, skills
 such as simulation, experimentation, hand skills, tool skills, machine skills and workshop practice are honed
 and perfected to the point where the learner may engage in the tasks set out for that particular term. The PAT
 accounts for 25% of the learner’s promotion mark.

• In Grades 10 – 11 the Practical Assessment Task is set and marked internally but externally moderated.

• In Grade 12 the Practical Assessment Task is externally set, internally marked and externally moderated.

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 83
 • Final examination: At the end of each academic year every learner is required to write a final examination,
 which is compiled in such a way that it represents the entire theoretical content covered throughout the year.
 The final examination paper accounts for 50% of the learner’s promotion mark and is externally set, marked and
 moderated.

Formal assessments should cater for a range of cognitive levels and learners’ abilities as shown below:

 Cognitive Levels Percentage of Task

 Lower order: knowledge 30%

 Middle order: comprehension and application 50%

 Higher order: analysis, evaluation and synthesis 20%

4.4 Projects

Learners will only do one project per subject per annum.

In Mechanical Technology, the PAT will serve as the project for learners in Grades 10 – 12. The PAT for Grade 12 is set
by the Department of Basic Education and the PAT for Grades 10 – 11 is set internally by the teacher.

A project (in this case the PAT) should require the learner to:

• Plan / prepare / investigate / research to solve the identified problem / task

• Perform the task / carry out instructions (according to given criteria)

• Develop the project according to the given criteria

• Allow for some innovation and creativity.

To set the project, the teacher should:

• Determine the content / skills / knowledge to be addressed

• Set clear criteria and give extensive instructions to guide the learner (the learner should know exactly what to do
 and what is expected)

• Keep the scope manageable

• Determine which resources will be required to complete the project and ensure that learners have access to these
 resources

• Determine the time frame / duration / due date

• Determine mark distribution and compile an assessment tool.

 84 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 4.5 Assessment

4.5.1 Programme of Assessment

The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout a
term. Without this programme, tests and tasks are crowded into the last few weeks of the term creating unfair pressure
on the learners.

The following is the Programme of Assessment for Grades 10 – 11

 GRADES 10 – 11 ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS
 % OF FINAL
 ASSESSMENT TERM TERM TERM TERM MARK
 PROMOTION
 TASKS 1 2 3 4 Weighting
 MARK
Tests 1 1 10 250 total
 converted to mark
 25
Mid-year examination 1 15 out of
 100
 þ þ þ
 Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
 (skills (skills task) (skills task) 250 total
Practical Assessment
 task) Phase Phase 4 converted to mark
Task (PAT) 25
 Plan for 4 under completed out of
Phase 1 – Phase 4
 phase 4 construction (project) 100
 (project)

Final examination 1 50 200
 TOTAL – PROMOTION MARK 400

The table below shows the compilation of the school-based assessment marks for Grades 10 and 11.

 DESCRIPTION TIME FRAME WEIGHTING OF FINAL MARK MARK ALLOCATION
 Term 1
 Control test 1 5% 50
 January – April
 Term 2
 Mid-year examination 15% 150
 Mid-year
 Term 3
 Control test 2 5% 50
 July – October
 Total 25% 250

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 85
 The following is the Programme of Assessment for Grade 12:

 GRADE 12 ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS

 86
 TERM TERM TERM TERM % OF FINAL MARK
 ASSESSMENT TASKS
 1 2 3 4 PROMOTION MARK Weighting

 Tests 1 5 450 total
 converted
 25 to mark
 Mid-year and Preparatory examination 1 1 20 out of
 100
 þ þ þ
 Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
 (skills (skills task) (skills task)
 Practical Assessment Task (PAT) task) Phase Phase 4 250 total converted to mark out of
 25
 Phase 1 – Phase 4 Plan for 4 under completed 100
 phase 4 construction (project)
 (project)

 Final examination 1 50 200
 TOTAL – PROMOTION MARK 400

 The table below shows the compilation of the school-based assessment mark Grade 12.

 DESCRIPTION TIME FRAME WEIGHTING OF FINAL 25% MARKS
 Control test Term 1 5% 50
 Mid-year examination Terms 1 & 2 10% 200

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Preparatory examination Term 3 10% 200
 Total 25% 450

 4.5.2 Tests

 A test for formal assessment should not consist of a series of small tests, but should cover a substantial amount of content and the duration should be at least 60 minutes and
 a minimum of 50 marks (allocate one mark per fact).

 Each test must cater for a range of cognitive levels.

 The forms of assessment used should be grade and development level appropriate. The design of these tasks should cover the content of the subject and include a variety
 of tasks intended to achieve the objectives of the subject.
 4.5.3 Examinations

Each examination must cater for a range of cognitive levels.

• For Grades 10, 11 and 12, the three-hour final examination in Mechanical Technology comprises 50% of a
 learner’s total mark (200 marks). All question papers set by the teacher throughout the year, including the final
 examination paper, must be moderated by the head of department at the school and approved by the Mechanical
 Technology curriculum advisor/facilitator for the district. This is done to ensure that the prescribed weightings are
 adhered to by the teacher.

• In the Grade 12 examination only Grade 12 content will be assessed. However, prior knowledge from Grades
 10 – 11 may be necessary to interpret and answer some of the questions.

Grades 10 and 11 Examination Paper

 Question Content covered Marks
 1 Multiple-choice questions 20
 2 Safety 10
 3 Tools and equipment 12
 4 Materials 13
 5 Terminology (manufacturing process) 30
 6 Joining methods 25
 7 Forces 30
 8 Maintenance 15
 9 Systems and control (only Fitting and Turning and Automotive) 25
 10 Engines, pumps and turbines (only Fitting and Turning and Automotive) 20
 TOTAL 200

Grade 12 Examination paper

 Question Content covered Marks
 1 Multiple-choice questions 20
 2 Safety 10
 3 Tools and equipment 12
 4 Materials 13
 5 Terminology (manufacturing process) 30
 6 Joining methods 25
 7 Forces 30
 8 Maintenance 15
 9 Systems and control (only Fitting and Machining and Automotive) 25
 10 Engines, pumps and turbines (only Fitting and Machining and Automotive) 20
 TOTAL 200

4.6 Recording

Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment
task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge as prescribed in the Curriculum and
Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual
progression within a grade and her/his readiness to progress or be promoted to the next grade. Records of learner
performance should also be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners in the teaching and learning
process.

Teachers will record actual marks against the tasks by using a record sheet and also report in percentages against the
subject on the learner’s report cards.

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 87
 4.7 Reporting

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other stakeholders.
Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways including report cards, parents’ meetings, school visitation
days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters, etc. Teachers in all grades report in
percentages against the subject.

In order for the school to report back to the parents on the progression of the learner from term to term, regular feedback
is given in the form of report cards. When compiling SBA term marks it is proposed that teachers make use of the control
tests, examination and simulation marks to show how the learner is progressing.

The weighting of the term mark will be done in accordance with the table in paragraph 4.5.1 above.

CODES AND PERCENTAGES FOR RECORDING AND REPORTING

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE
 7 Outstanding achievement 80 – 100%
 6 Meritorious achievement 70 – 79%
 5 Substantial achievement 60 – 69%
 4 Adequate achievement 50 – 59%
 3 Moderate achievement 40 – 49%
 2 Elementary achievement 30 – 39%
 1 Not achieved 0 – 29%
Note: The seven point scale should have clear descriptors that give detailed information for each level.

4.8 Moderation of assessment

Moderation refers to the process which ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should
be implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation practices
should be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

4.8.1 PAT moderation

Moderation of each term’s PAT phases can start as early as the following term i.e. phase 1 can be moderated as soon
as the second term starts. The final product (project) will be moderated upon completion.

The moderation process is as follows:

• During moderation learners may be selected at random to demonstrate the different skills developed during the
 PAT. All phases will be moderated.

• Learners being moderated will have access to their completed project during moderation and may refer to the
 phases they completed earlier in the year.

• Learners may not seek assistance from other learners during moderation.

• All projects must be on display for the moderator.

• The moderator will select at random a representative sample of projects in accordance of the moderation policy.

• Upon completion the moderator will, if needed, adjust the marks of the group up or downwards, depending on the
 decision reached as a result of moderation.

• Normal examination protocols for appeals will be adhered to if a dispute arises from adjustments made.

 88 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 4.8.2 SBA moderation

Moderation of written tests and examinations will be conducted by the curriculum facilitator or a peer teacher. Grade 10
and 11 tasks are internally moderated except for the PAT that is externally moderated. The curriculum/subject advisor
must moderate a sample of these tasks during school visits, to verify the standard of the internal moderation. Moderation
of written tests constitutes a re-mark of the learner’s work to ensure assessment by the teacher is correct.

Grade 12 tasks should be moderated on three tiers: school, district and province.

School-based moderation requires the HOD to check/control the following:

(a) Learner compliance:

• Work done by learners must comply with the following requirements:

• Date

• Topic

• Homework assignments reflecting a textbook page and exercise reference

• Learner scripts are required to show scrutiny and interaction from the teacher in red pen.

• All teacher actions/interventions in the script must be dated

• Learners are required to mark all self-assessments in pencil and all corrections to be shown in pencil.

(b) Safety:

• Learners are required to dress appropriately when entering the workshop

• Personal safety should be adhered to

• Learner conduct in the workshop must be orderly and appropriate

• Learners are required to enact safety drills, practise safe operating procedures, perform housekeeping tasks and
 assist in workshop preventative maintenance such as cleaning, painting, sanding, etc.

(c) Practical Assessment Tasks/Session in the workshop:

• Learners are required to actively engage in practical assessment tasks, assignments, simulations and experiments

• Learners who are un-cooperative will receive de-merits or a zero mark allocation for that particular section of work

• Learners who act unsafely in a workshop, placing other learners in danger, will be removed from the workshop
 and will have to perform additional tasks / engage in corrective behaviour tasks to show improvement in safety
 awareness and skill. This will be done outside of normal contact time.

(d) Teacher compliance:

• Preparation done by the teacher includes:

• Keeping to pace setters / work schedule

• Work schedule dates are planned and achieved dates are indicated

• Lesson preparation for each topic

• Lesson preparation and dates in learners’ books are aligned

• Worksheets/tasks/homework assignments in lesson preparation with learners’ books

• Work is done every day in the learners’ books

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 89
 • Workbooks are regularly checked and dated by the teacher

• Tests have memorandums before the test is written

• Examinations and major tests are moderated by a peer teacher / district facilitator.

(e) Workshop management:

• Storeroom is indexed, neat and clean

• Inventory is kept up to date every 6 months

• Workshop is clean and neat

• Preventative maintenance schedule is drawn up

• Workshop budget is prepared and ready

• Procurement schedule for PAT and consumable items are kept up to date

• Replacement of old equipment is planned and rolled out

• OHS Act adhered to at all times

(f) Classroom management:

• Classroom is neat and clean

• Posters and exhibits are evident

• Pin boards are neatly populated

• Teacher workstation/desk is neat and clean

• Filing is neat and tidy

4.9 Practical Assessment Task (PAT)

The Department of Basic Education issues a PAT for Grade 12 every year. The format of the Grade 12 PAT is duplicated
for Grades 10 – 11.

In all grades each learner must do a practical assessment task for the year

• Grades 10 – 11: Teachers will set and assess the Practical Assessment Task and it will be moderated externally
 by the subject specialists.

• Grade 12: The practical assessment tasks for Grade 12 will be assessed by the teacher and will be externally
 moderated by the provincial subject specialists.

• The date for the external moderation will be decided by the province in which the school is situated.

• The provincial education departments and schools may not use the tasks of the previous years.

• Providing the resources for the Practical Assessment Task is the responsibility of the school; the school should
 ensure that adequate time and funding is allocated for the completion of the Practical Assessment Task.

Practical sessions must be scheduled in such a way that learners have enough time to practise skills needed for the
completion of the PAT. Weekly practice sessions are needed for the learner to hone the necessary skills.

FOUR hours of contact time is prescribed per week, of which TWO hours is intended for theory and TWO hours for the
completion of practical work and the PAT (ONE double period – at least one hour continuous – is required for practical
work).

It is essential that at least a ONE hour continuous time period be allocated for practical sessions.

 90 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 NB The completed PAT project will be made up from different phases and tasks.

Practical sessions should be scheduled in such a way that learners have enough time to practise skills needed for the
completion of the PAT. Weekly practice sessions are needed for the learner to hone the necessary skills. A guideline of
2 hours per week is given for Grades 10 – 11.

In cases where Grades 10 – 11 PAT tasks and topics are set by the teacher internally, the head of department at
the school and the Mechanical Technology district subject facilitator are required to approve each task before it is
implemented in the workshop.

Provinces may opt to develop PATs for Grades 10 – 11 to ensure a unified curriculum approach. However, the PAT may
not contradict the design principles outlined in the Grade 12 PAT.

The compilation of the PAT Grades 10 to 12 mark is detailed in the table below:

Description Time Frame Weighting of Final 25% Marks
• Phase 1 Terminology / Manufacturing January – March 5% 50

• Plan and prepare for PAT phase 4
 task
• Phase 2 Joining April – June 5% 50

• PAT final task phase 4 under
 construction
• Phase 3 Maintenance / July – September 5% 50
 Experimentation / Simulation task

• Completion of phase 4
• Phase 4 Final Product July – September 10% 100

• Moderation of PAT
Total 25% 250

Although the final PAT product only needs to be completed in the third term, learners should start working on phase 4
from the first term in order to avoid running out of time to complete the PAT.

4.10 Progression/promotion

A learner needs to achieve at least 30% of the final mark to pass Mechanical Technology.

4.11 General

This document should be read in conjunction with:

4.11.1 National policy pertaining to the program and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R – 12

4.11.2 Policy Document, National Protocol for Assessment Grade R – 12

 CAPS MECHANICAL TECHNOLOGY 91
 92 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)