Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Two Oceans Aquarium in partnership with the Department of Basic Education

Marine Sciences
Curriculum Assessment Policy Statement CAPS Gr 10-12

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 1
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT

GRADES 10-12

 MARINE SCIENCES

2 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 3
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Department of Basic Education

222 Struben Street
Private Bag X895
Pretoria 0001
South Africa
Tel: +27 12 357 3000
Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street Private Bag X9023
Cape Town 8000
South Africa
Tel: +27 21 465 1701
Fax: +27 21 461 8110
Website: http://www.education.gov.za

2018 Department of Basic Education

4 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

FOREWORD BY THE MINISTER
Our national curriculum is the culmination of our efforts over a period of seventeen years to
transform the curriculum bequeathed to us by apartheid. From the start of democracy we have
built our curriculum on the values that inspired our Constitution (Act 108 of 1996). The Preamble
to the Constitution states that the aims of the Constitution are to:

 • heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values,
 social justice and fundamental human rights;
 •
 • improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person;
 •
 • lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is based
 on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by law; and
 •
 • build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a
 sovereign state in the family of nations.

Education and the curriculum have an important role to play in realizing these aims.

In 1997 we introduced outcomes-based education to overcome the curricular divisions of the
past, but the experience of implementation prompted a review in 2000. This led to the first
curriculum revision: the Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9 and the National
Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (2002).

Ongoing implementation challenges resulted in another review in 2009 and we revised the
Revised National Curriculum Statement (2002) and the National Curriculum Statement Grades
10-12 to produce this document.

From 2012 the two national Curriculum statements, for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12
respectively, are combined in a single document and will simply be known as the National
Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. The National Curriculum Statement for Grades R-12 builds
on the previous curriculum but also updates it and aims to provide clearer specification of what is
to be taught and learnt on a term-by-term basis.

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 represents a policy statement for learning and
teaching in South African schools and comprises of the following:

 a) Curriculum and Assessment Policy statements (CAPs) for all approved subjects listed in this
 document;
 b) National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and
 (c) National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12.

Signature here

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 5
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

CONTENTS
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY ........................................... 7
SECTION 2: INTRODUCTION TO MARINE SCIENCES .................................................................................................... 13
 2.1 Background ................................................................................................................................................. 13
 2.2 What is Marine Sciences? ........................................................................................................................... 15
 2.3 The Purpose of studying Marine Sciences .................................................................................................. 16
 2.3.1 Apply the scientific method to develop an understanding of Marine Sciences content.................... 16
 2.3.2 Develop science process skills ............................................................................................................ 16
 2.3.3 Understand the role of science in society........................................................................................... 16
 2.4 General Aims ............................................................................................................................................... 17
 2.5 Specific Aims ............................................................................................................................................... 17
 2.6 Attitudes and Values ......................................................................................................................................... 19
 2.7 Time Allocation ........................................................................................................................................... 20
 2.8 Resources .................................................................................................................................................... 20
SECTION 3: CONTENT CONCEPT AND PROGRESSION ................................................................................................. 21
Section 3.1 Grade 10 ................................................................................................................................................... 28
SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT IN MARINE SCIENCE ......................................................................................................... 160
 4.1 Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 160
 4.2 Informal Assessment and Daily Assessment ............................................................................................ 160
 4.3 Formal Assessment ................................................................................................................................... 161
 4.4 Assessment Requirements for Marine Sciences ....................................................................................... 163
 4.4.1 Grade 10: Programme of Formal Assessment .................................................................................. 163
 4.4.2 Grade 11: Programme of Formal Assessment ................................................................................. 164
 4.4.3 Grade 12: Programme of Formal Assessment ......................................................................................... 165
 4.5 The End-of-Year Examinations: ................................................................................................................. 166
 4.6 Recording and Reporting .......................................................................................................................... 168
 4.7 Moderation of Assessment ....................................................................................................................... 169
 4.8 General...................................................................................................................................................... 171

6 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY

INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM ANDASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS FOR MARINE
SCIENCES GRADES 10-12

1.1 Background

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the
schooling sector.

To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming into
effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was developed for
each subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines
in Grades R-12.

1.2 Overview

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for learning
 and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12 (January 2012).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) replaces the two current national curricula
 statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of 31 May 2002,
 and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6 October 2003 and
 No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii) comprise the following policy
 documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January
 2012) during the period 2012-2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment
 Guidelines for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the General
 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 7
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Education and Training Band, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in Government Gazette No.
 29626 of 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette No.27819 of 20 July 2005;

 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special
 needs, published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy
 document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol
 for Assessment (Grades R-12), promulgated in Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette
 No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.

(d) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy as
 contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South African Schools Act,
 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to determine minimum outcomes
 and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the assessment of learner achievement to be
 applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values worth
 learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply knowledge
 and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes knowledge in
 local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 serves the purposes of:

  equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability or
 intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment, and meaningful
 participation in society as citizens of a free country;
  providing access to higher education;
  facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and
  providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is based on the following principles:

  social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that equal
 educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;
  active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than rote and
 uncritical learning of given truths;
8 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

  high knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at each
 grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;
  progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;
  human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices of social and
 environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is sensitive to issues of diversity such as poverty, inequality,
 race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;
  valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country as
 important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and
  credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and depth to
 those of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

  identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;
  work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;
  organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;
  collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;
  communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;
  use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the environment and
 the health of others; and
  demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem solving
 contexts do not exist in isolation.

(e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This can
 only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to learning,
 and how to plan for diversity.

 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant support
 structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based Support Teams, Institutional-Level
 Support Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers in the classroom,
 teachers should use various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those included in the Department of
 Basic Education’s Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 9
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

1.4 Time allocation

1.4.1 Foundation Phase
(a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 Grade R Grades 1-2 Grade 3
 Subject (Hours) (Hours) (Hours)

 Home Language 10 8/7 8/7
 First Additional Language 2/3 3/4
 Mathematics 7 7 7
 Life Skills 6 6 7
 Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)
 Creative Arts
 (2) (2) (2)
 Physical Education
 (2) (2) (2)
 Personal and Social Well-being
 (1) (1) (1)

 Total 23 23 25

(b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8 hours and a
 minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and a maximum of 3 hours for
 Additional Language in Grades 1-2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated
 for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

(d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R-2 and 2 hours as indicated by the hours in
 brackets for Grade 3.

10 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 Subject Hours

 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Mathematics 6
 Natural Sciences and Technology 3,5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4
 Creative Arts (1,5)
 Physical Education
 (1)
 Personal and Social Well-being
 (1,5)

 Total 27,5

1.4.3 Senior Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 Subject Hours

 Home Language 5
 First Additional Language 4
 Mathematics 4,5
 Natural Sciences 3
 Social Sciences 3
 Technology 2
 Economic Management Sciences 2
 Life Orientation 2
 Creative Arts 2

 Total 27,5

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 11
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

1.4.4 Grades 10-12

(a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:

 Subject Time Allocation per Week (Hours)

 Home Language 4.5

 First Additional Language 4.5

 Mathematics 4.5

 Life Orientation 2
 A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group B 1 12 (3x4h)
 Annexure B, Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National policy
 pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, subject to the
 provisos stipulated in paragraph 28 of the said policy document.
 Total 27,5

 The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified above,
 and may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish
 to offer additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

12 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

SECTION 2: INTRODUCTION TO MARINE SCIENCES
2.1 Background
 Humans become fascinated with the sea from their very first connection, be that seeing sharks, rays and fish
 in the kelp forests at an aquarium, or the first salty taste of sea water, and the feeling of cobble stones or the
 textured sand beneath one’s feet. Once introduced to the ocean, people immediately recognise the strong
 connection to and influence that the ocean has on them. The ocean can be a source of extremes, from gentle
 calm conditions to threateningly stormy seas.

 It can come as a surprise to learn that seventy percent of our planet is covered by water. It is the habitat to
 countless known and undiscovered species of plants and animals. The sea contains natural resources that are
 of interest and value to humans, but human activity invariably affects sensitive habitats that are home to
 thousands of species- places where delicate balances should be maintained.

 Earth’s weather and climate is also strongly influenced by the sea as moisture and heat energy are transferred
 from water to bodies of air that then circulate around the world producing weather events which range in
 extremes from tropical storms to doldrum sea states, where no winds blow. At one point in time all land – and
 the ancestors of all life as we know it - was submerged by our planet’s sea water. The ocean basins contain
 forceful geological processes which cause the movement of mountains and continents! Powerful forces are
 present in waves and currents that have given rise to names such as Namibia’s Skeleton Coast; and South
 Africa’s Wild Coast and the Cape of Storms.

 Humans have many varied bonds with the ocean. Seafood has been a source of sustenance from earliest
 times – indeed it is thought that the quality proteins that came from eating food from the sea provided a push
 to human mental development. The ocean has been a means of travelling, exploration and trade since very
 early times as people discovered how to use ocean currents and trade winds to increase the efficiency of their
 travel. The impact of the sea on the spiritual life of people who have lived by, from and on the sea made its
 presence central to their understanding of the world and their own identities. The ocean contributes valuably
 to the provision of food, mineral resources, transport, trade, tourism, recreation and inspiration. Marine
 environments are a key element of the South African economy and require effective management. This has
 been recognised by the implementing of Operation Phakisa to contribute to the South African Blue Economy.

 However, humans have also affected the ocean significantly since the start of the Industrial Revolution, with
 resulting ocean acidification, climate change, coral bleaching, over-harvesting of sea-life such as abalone and
 fish caught by line off the South African coast, and sometimes excessive or careless mining and transportation
 of minerals and oil which can cause total destruction of marine environments as was the case with the Treasure
 oil spill off Robben Island in July 2000.

 The increase of human population has placed unprecedented pressure on resources above and below sea
 level. Students of Marine Sciences will become aware of the ocean’s influences on humans and humans’
 influences on the oceans. The Marine Sciences Curriculum is designed to develop a sense of belonging and
 commitment to the oceanic environment among Marine Sciences students in the FET Phase in order to help
 develop informed global citizens, who act in accordance with scientifically-substantiated decisions and

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 13
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 contribute to the health of our planet’s oceans as future scientists, journalists, teachers or specialists informing
 governmental policies.

 Amongst scientists and teachers with a passion for the oceans of the world the idea of ‘Ocean Literacy’ is
 being shared as a way of raising all people’s consciousness of the impact we are having on the sea and the
 life above, on and in it. This approach is guided by ideas from around the world (including South Africa) and
 is facilitated by the National Marine Educators Association of America. Teachers of Marine Sciences agree
 that all people should understand seven essential principles about the ocean:
 1. The earth has one big ocean with many features.
 2. The ocean and life in the ocean shape the features of earth.
 3. The ocean is a major influence on weather and climate.
 4. The ocean made earth habitable.
 5. The ocean supports a great diversity of life and ecosystems.
 6. The ocean and humans are inextricably interconnected.
 7. The ocean is largely unexplored.

 A focus of this Marine Sciences course is therefore to nurture citizens, who can communicate about the ocean
 in a meaningful way and make informed decisions about the ocean and the wise use of its resources.

 To become successful in any ocean-related career, students need to be aware of the fragility of our planet, our
 dependence on the ocean, its beauty and value. Climate change is a threat that needs to be understood and
 minimised, especially with regard to food security given Africa’s increasing human population.

14 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

2.2 What is Marine Sciences?
 Marine Sciences is an inter-disciplinary subject designed to educate learners with an interest in the ocean, its
 workings and its impact on the life of the planet and human populations so that they are able to recognise and
 want to take up the work- and study opportunities associated with the marine environment.

 The content within Marine Sciences is woven together to form a multidisciplinary field. It builds connections
 between the realms of water, sediments, rocks and air, living organisms that inhabit the ocean and human
 engagements with all of these. It draws attention to ocean ecosystems and their sensitivity to human activity
 and resource use. Decision makers and the general public need an increased awareness about the complex
 relationships that affect the ocean. The course will equip learners with a thorough understanding, to think about
 ways to conserve and sustain the ocean for the future and is informed by four strands,:

 1. Oceanography including Marine Geology, Geography, Chemistry and Physics that explains
  the sea floor and sediments together with the structure and origins of coastlines and how these
 change over time.
  the chemical composition and properties of sea water, and the effects of pollutants on ocean life.
  the ways in which the ocean acts as a driver of weather and climate.
  the waves, tides and currents,
 2. Marine Biology investigates the classification, fundamental biology, evolutionary processes, marine
 biodiversity and the adaptation of organisms to their environments.
 3. Ecology explores ecosystems such as rocky shores, kelp forests and sandy beaches through
 ecological concepts including nutrient cycles and food chains.
 4. Humans and the Ocean highlights
  marine careers,
  Marine Protected Areas as a model for sustainably managing ocean resources.
  the harvesting of renewable and use of non-renewable ocean resources
  the importance of research in understanding the ocean and the effects that human activities and
 practices have on the ocean and larger global patterns (for example Climate Change and Ocean
 Acidification).

 The issue of sustainability is foregrounded in the teaching of the entire subject.

 All four strands are to be taught in each school term. This approach facilitates the possibility of more than one
 teacher teaching the subject in a school year. For example, the subject lends itself to being taught by a Life
 Sciences/ Biology teacher who would teach the Marine Biology component and an Oceanography/Geography
 teacher who would teach the Oceanography, Ecology and Humans & the Ocean content. Each strand
 increases in complexity over the three FET years which are scaffolded from one tier to another.

 The four strands are unpacked in detail in Section 3 where the planning across grades 10 to 12 is shown, with
 suggested time allocations given per topic. The table below summarises the distribution of hours across the
 strands and the three Grades.

 Strands Weighting by time allocation across grades (Hours)
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
 Oceanography 32 14 30
 Marine Biology 56 56 25 **(+6)
 Ecology 8 16 5 **(+12)
 Humans and the Ocean 14 16 17 ** (+8)

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 15
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 ** Includes the hours taught in Gr11 4th Quarter and included in the Gr12 final Examination.

2.3 The Purpose of studying Marine Sciences
 The purpose of studying Marine Sciences is three-fold. The intention is that learners of the subject will acquire
 and be able to use the following large conceptual abilities. They will be able to:

 2.3.1 Apply the scientific method to develop an understanding of Marine Sciences
 content
 All science courses should train learners that unsubstantiated information cannot simply be taken as fact. As
 learners engage with the Marine Sciences content, so scientific thinking develops alongside the skills that
 help to formulate the basis for an inquiry or experimentation. Consequently, learners gradually recognise the
 need to use evidence, evaluate the validity of data and learn to be able to formulate inferences from the
 information available.

 These activities build upon our conceptual understanding in improving our scientific conceptualisation.
 Teachers should facilitate learners’ development of the thinking and reasoning skills which are required to
 support the formation and the modification of concepts and theories about the natural world.

 2.3.2 Develop science process skills
 A key purpose of teaching Marine Sciences is to induct learners into using process skills in their investigations
 as they explore and engage with the ocean and its phenomena. The scientific process includes an incremental
 development of thoughts and perspectives by:

  defining a problem which learners have observed in a marine context
  undertaking further observations
  reading about the topic to better inform themselves in formulating a hypothesis
  investigating the hypothesis via experimentation
  using the data collected from the experiments to develop conclusion/s and generalisation/s
  which prove or disprove the hypothesis.

 Using Marine Sciences content, teachers must create a supportive environment where the learners themselves
 exercise their intelligence, creativity a n d responsibility with increasing confidence. Learners need to develop
 the ability to analyse and reason but also to use process skills to investigate, reflect on, synthesise f i n d i n g s
 and communicate their conclusions.

 The focus with regard to process skills is on conducting a scientific rather than a casual investigation.

 2.3.3 Understand the role of science in society
 The study of science is often perceived as being remote from everyday human existence. However, within
 the study of a subject such as Marine Sciences, learners will soon recognise that the ocean impacts on the
 lives of humans. The study of Marine Sciences alerts learners to the social, political and economic impacts
 that decisions regarding the ocean have. In this fashion, learners come to recognise the critical role that
 Marine Sciences must play in informing us about our engagement with our ocean planet.

16 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 The fact that oceans influence humans and humans influence the oceans, is undisputed. Marine Sciences
 learning, by its nature occurs in a social setting, apart from the historical association with seafood harvesting
 and the ocean as a transport medium, the relationship between humans and the oceans is inextricably
 connected. Any study of science should have a purpose and an outcome of developing critical thinking skills
 about scientific concepts. Marine Sciences should be taught in a way in which learners become aware of the
 sensitive nature of ocean ecosystems, ocean life and ocean resources, and the need for humans to utilise the
 oceans in a way that minimises human impacts.

 Each of these major purposes presupposes a set of skills, values, and attitudes which are acquired concurrently
 with content outlined in Section 3. These are more fully described in Section 2.5

2.4 General Aims
 The general aims of Marine Sciences are to:

 a. Foster a deep interest in and enjoyment of the scientific study of the ocean.
 b. Provide opportunities for learners to acquire knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the marine
 environment.
 c. Develop thinking and process skills that form part of natural arouse curiosity and investigations about
 the natural world, nurture creativity and the use of scientific method.
 d. Develop attitudes such as perseverance and objectivity for the meaningful and ethical pursuit of
 science/knowledge/learning.
 e. Communicate effectively in a variety of ways and using different media on matters related to the study
 of Marine Science.
 f. Stimulate interest in and care for the South African and global environment and understand that, used
 responsibly, science can contribute to meaningful social, economic and political participation.
 g. Offer educational opportunities that allow learners to gain sufficient understanding, knowledge and
 confidence to become responsible citizens who are able to take an informed interest in matters of
 scientific importance.

 This set of aims are translated into the more focused specific aims or outcomes which explain what successful
 Marine Sciences learners ought to know and be able to demonstrate through performance

2.5 Specific Aims
 The four specific aims serve the three ‘big picture’ purposes for the Marine Sciences. The specific aims
 describe the skills that learners can be expected to acquire during their study. These skills are used to
 engage with the multi-disciplinary content detailed in Section 3.

 The specific aims for Marine Sciences are:

 2.5.1. Increase learners’ understanding of core Marine Sciences knowledge

 By the end of the programme, learners will be able to:

 a. Read information critically considering the possibility of authorial bias in that the author may be
 presenting an opinion about a topic rather than a set of unsubstantiated ideas.
 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 17
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 b. Access information from a variety of sources such as reference books, textbooks, online articles,
 You-Tube videos, the opinions of experts, community members and peer views.
 c. Select the most relevant information for the immediate task(s) and note any significant anomalies
 d. Distinguish between facts, assertions, assumptions, hypotheses, theories, predictions and
 inferences in the texts they encounter; recognise in their own study what assumptions they make,
 when they are drawing inferences.
 e. Summarise information and show evidence of an accurate synopsis in a variety of formats such as
 – a written summary that refers to and includes tables, graphs, flow charts and similar graphic
 representations.
 f. Present the information in a format that communicates to a wide audience, which could be a written
 text, a verbal presentation accompanied by slides, a group activity that illustrates the understanding
 of new content and its relation to prior knowledge and insight. Such processes will rely on the recall
 of information, and the accurate description of concepts, processes, mechanisms, principles,
 theories.
 g. Understand the structure and style used in scientific reports.
 h. Acknowledge their sources accurately and reliably.
 i. Understand that plagiarism is deeply dishonest and will give rise to disciplinary action.

 2.5.2. Observe and record meticulously so that investigations lead to reputable scientific conclusions
 and generalisations

 By the end of the programme, learners will be able to:

 a. use the language of science, its terminology and vocabulary and its discourse.
 b. describe the nature of science as a reliable way of explaining patterns observed in the natural world.
 c. describe the purpose of science and develop explanatory theories that account for events in the
 natural world. This is done through a careful and systematic study of natural phenomena, and being
 aware that from time to time a revolution in thinking and a paradigm shift is needed
 d. describe the use of a controlled experiment as a way of collecting rigorous evidence using an
 experiment and a control; the use of dependent, independent and controlled variables
 e. identify an issue/problem to investigate and consider possible solutions before selecting a plausible
 hypothesis to test through an experiment.
 f. Work collaboratively with others but also on their own.
 g. Explain the importance of data collection as intrinsic to the scientific method, and undertake their
 own collection of data.
 h. Explain the importance of recording data accurately, whether in the forms of measurements,
 written descriptions, photographs, drawings or diagrams, and undertake the recording of data.
 i. Explain how the analysis of patterns in data allow for inferences to be made and actively seek for
 patterns in the data that the learner has collected.
 j. Explain the need to avoid bias and to strive for objectivity in collecting and interpreting data and
 how science uses both deductive and inductive reasoning to advance understanding the natural world.
 k. Explain the value of science in forming ever-deeper understanding of natural phenomena and its role
 in predicting and/or anticipating future states or events.

 2.5.3. Understand the importance of making defensible scientifically-informed decisions to limit human
 impact on marine ecosystems

 By the end of the programme, learners will be able to:
18 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 a. Describe instances where poor management decisions may have impacted on an ecosystem
 b. Explain the variables that are known to negatively impact upon an ecosystem
 c. Suggest strategies which would help remediate the disaster or similar disasters
 d. Research a current issue in the marine environment where a decision is in danger of impacting
 negatively on an ecosystem, analyse the problems that are likely to emerge and present the findings
 e. Recommend one or more alternative proposals that would address the issue in a less harmful way.

 2.5.4 Understand and appreciate the historical- and present-day discoveries in the Marine Sciences
 field, and to recognise the connections between indigenous knowledge of the oceans and
 current scientific explanations;

 By the end of the programme, learners will be able to:

 f. Understand the history of ocean discoveries from early records to the recent past in which technological
 development since the early 1900s paved the way from piano wire depth “sounding” to sonar and
 satellite recording of oceanographic data.
 g. Explain how different cultures and their languages organise the understanding of phenomena
 coherently but differently (eg colour, number, animal classes), and how such categorizations may bring
 different insights to the study of the natural world
 h. Explain the value which such alternative classifications can/do offer the study of science.

2.6 Attitudes and Values
 The general aims for the Marine Sciences have alluded to some of the attitudes and values built in to the
 curriculum. They are:

 a. An understanding of science and how it develops over time is invaluable to learners as global citizens.
 b. As learners understand the ocean’s influence on their lives and human influence on the ocean, they
 are made aware of interspecies equity
 c. Marine Sciences is best learned in enabling learning environments, as oppose to a context that
 depends upon memorization and recall. Such an educational environment encourages learners to
 participate actively in the learning process, to identify problems, seek solutions – often with others, to
 plan and be able to implement plans of action.
 d. The learning in Marine Sciences encourages learners to manage their learning process; to value and
 rely on their own creativity and ability to persevere, and to work ethically.
 e. A high value is placed on the ability to communicate what one is learning – in both formal and informal
 contexts,
 f. The subject, Marine Sciences, proceeds on the basis that each person increasingly understands the
 need for responsible engagement with the ocean (locally and globally) and is willing to act responsibly
 based on such insight/s.
 g. The importance of critical, logical thinking and of self-reflection stems not only from the demands of
 the subject but also from the fact that these skills are needed for learners to become responsible,
 thinking citizens.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 19
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

2.7 Time Allocation
 The time allocated to Marine Sciences is 4 hours per week, in Grades 10 to 12. The curriculum has been
 designed to be completed within the weeks shown in the table below. Gr10 and Gr 11 requires 4 hours in 32
 weeks out of 40 weeks in the school year. This leaves 8 weeks for examinations, tests and disruptions due to
 other school activities. The curriculum for Grade 12 has been designed to be completed within 27½ weeks;
 this leaves 12½ weeks for examinations, tests and disruptions due to other school activities. In Grades 10 to
 12 the time allocated for teaching the content includes practical tasks and investigations, which are
 integral to the teaching and learning process.

 Weeks of Teaching
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
 Teaching content includes practical tasks, field work 32 32 27½
 and investigations, which are integral to the teaching
 and learning process
 Exams, tests, other school activities 8 8 12½
 Total 40 40 40

2.8 Resources
 In Section 3, the resources needed for teaching each topic appear in the right-hand column. This information
 helps guide teachers with planning and preparation. The Marine Sciences teaching and learning resources
 include both digital and practical equipment.

 Marine Sciences has been designed with the use of digital teaching and learning resource materials. The
 resources will be electronically circulated to schools that offer Marine Sciences by Two Oceans Aquarium on
 storage drives. A paperless (digital) approach is promoted to reduce the carbon footprint and to facilitate
 updating material via the Two Oceans Aquarium’s website. Equipment will be circulated on loan as part of the
 “Two Oceans Aquarium Equipment Library”. Teachers must refer to Branch G; The Living Shores of Southern
 Africa 2018. The on line resources explain the specific depth at which the content is to be taught. Continuous
 professional development teacher workshops will be arranged to enable Marine Sciences teachers to optimally
 use each resource. This will include “Skype Mentoring” of teachers by the Two Oceans Aquarium.

20 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

SECTION 3: CONTENT CONCEPT AND PROGRESSION

 NOTE TO TEACHERS
 1. The different colours presented in the table of topics have specific reference to the following
 strands :

 Marine Biology
 Humans and the Oceans
 Oceanography
 Ecology

 2. When using the teaching plan, pay particular attention to the depth column. It guides the
 level of detail that needs to be applied to each specific topic. The depth of content will be
 covered more fully in the resource material which will be provided.
 3. To navigate through Section 3 please note
 a. It is firstly divided into Gr 10 then Gr 11 and then Gr12. It is not in the order
 which would be found in Oceanography or Marine Biology Text books.
 b. Each grade has a fairly equal spread between Oceanography; Marine Ecology and
 Humans and the Oceans, while Marine Biology is allocated more time than the
 rest.
 c. The Subject Marine Sciences consists of topics numbered in this section from 1
 to 86.
 d. At the top of each topic page is the
 i. Topic Number and name
 ii. The recommended term in which it should be taught
 iii. The number of recommended hours which should be taken to teach the
 topic.
 iv. The Depth, indicating level of detail.
 v. The Key Content Concepts
 vi. Suggested practicals and investigations and
 vii. Resources, which can be referred to.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 21
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

3.3. Marine Sciences: Concept and Progression

Marine Sciences: Concept and Progression Gr 10

 Topic
 No Grade 10 Term 1 Hours
 1 Introduction to Marine Sciences 2
 2 Scientific Inquiry 6
 3 History of Marine Sciences Research and Ocean Discovery 1
 4 Life Processes and the Chemistry of Life 5
 5 Cell Biology 12
 6 Origin of Planet Earth 1
 7 Interior of the Earth 2
 8 Geological time 1
 Hours Term 1 Gr 10 30

 Grade 10 Term 2
 9 Topography of the Ocean Floor and Ocean Basins 2
 10 Plate tectonics 2
 11 The Ocean Planet - Physical Properties of Water 8
 12 Energy Transmission in Water- Heat 2
 13 Energy Transmission in Water- Light and Light Absorption 2
 14 Introduction to Evolution and Evolution Mechanisms 4
 15 Basic Classification 1
 16 Evolutionary trends, Body plans, symmetry and life patterns 5
 17 Plankton 1
 18 Protists 3

 Hours Term 2 Gr 10 30

22 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Grade 10 Term 3
19 Tides 1
20 Salinity 2
21 The Atmosphere 2
22 Air Movement on the Earth’s surface 3
23 Chart work– Location Systems and the Shape of Earth 4
24 Ecological concepts introduction and Nutrient Cycling C N P 4
25 Porifera 4
26 Cnidaria- Introduction and Cnidarian classes 6
27 Platyhelminthes 3
 Hours Term 3 Gr 10 29

 Grade 10 Term 4
28 Other unsegmented worms 2
29 Annelida and Annelid groups 4
30 Arthropoda- Introduction and Marine Arthropod groups 6
31 Human Impacts upon Ocean Biodiversity (HIPPO) 5
 Hours Term 4 Gr 10 17

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 23
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Marine Sciences: Concept and Progression Gr 11

 Grade 11
 Grade 11 Term 1 Hours
 32 Marine Careers 4
 33 Scientific Inquiry 2
 34 Sediments 2
 35 Harvesting of Marine Resources 2
 36 Important Metabolic Processes 8
 37 Nucleic Acids- DNA and RNA 5
 38 Cell Division 5

 Hours Term 1 Gr 11 28

 Grade 11 Term 2
 39 The Ocean Planet – The Chemistry of Sea Water 6
 40 Energy Transmission through Water- Sound 2
 41 pH 2
 42 Currents 2
 43 Genetics 5
 44 Viruses and Bacteria 2
 45 Cyanobacteria Phytoplankton (Microalgae) 3
 46 Seaweeds (Macroalgae) - Introduction Green and Red 7
 Hours Term 2 Gr 11 29

24 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Grade 11
 Grade 11 Term 3 Hours
47
 Brown Algae- Chromista 2
48 2
 Vascular plants
49 Mollusca and Mollusc Classes 7
50 Animals Marine Life cycles Larvae 1
51 Bryozoa 1
52 Population Dynamics 4
53 South African Marine Ecosystems 2
54 The Open Ocean 2
55 Shores Introduction 8
 Hours Term 3 Gr 11 29

 Grade 11 Term 4
55 Rocky Shores continued and Sandy Beaches 4
56 Echinoderms and Echinoderm classes 6
57 Human Exploitation of Marine Resources and Indigenous Knowledge 2
58 Over Fishing and SASSI 2
59 Marine Protected Areas 2
60 Ecotourism 4
 Hours Term 4 Gr 11 18

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 25
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Marine Sciences: Concept and Progression Gr 12

 Grade 12

 Grade 12 Term 1 Hours
 61 Diving Science Water Gas laws 2
 62 Estuaries 3
 63 Chordata Urochordata 2
 64 Vertebrate Introduction 1
 65 Agnatha 1
 66 Chondrichthyes 5
 67 Osteicthyes 5
 68 Terrestrial Vertebrate Classes and Returning to the Sea 2
 69 Marine Reptiles 3
 70 Marine Birds 3
 71 Marine Mammals 3
 Hours Term 1 Gr 12 30

 Grade 12 Term 2
 72 Kelp Forests 2
 73 Waves; Energy transfer 4
 74 Chemical composition of water 4
 75 Ekman Spiral and Eddies 4
 76 Scientific Inquiry Gr12 (Prescribed Practical Work) 9
 77 SA Shoreline 2
 78 Coastal Formations 2
 79 Climate Change 2
 80 Ocean Acidification 1
 Hours Term 2 Gr 12 30

26 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Grade 12 Term 3 Hours
81 El Niño 3
82 Aquaculture of Marine Species 4
83 Commercial use of Marine Algae 3
84 Harvesting Ocean Energy 4
85 Biomimicry 3
 Hours Term 3 Gr 12 17

 Grade 12 Term 4
 Revision and Preparation for the Final Exam
 Final Examination

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 27
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Section 3.1 Grade 10

28 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

1. Introduction to Marine Sciences
 Term 1 Strand – Humans and the Ocean

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 2 Hours The Depth of this 1. Marine Sciences is a wide field in which many different specialties focus on a common goal of understanding the Use a structured Videos
 topic is at a level ocean. This includes studies in Geology, Geography, Chemistry, Geophysics, Meteorology, Botany, Zoology, Ecology, approach to introduce
 where learners Conservation Biology, Natural and Environmental Resource Management, and Engineering Sciences. In South Africa, the equipment used, A range of websites
 understand the one must study Maths and Physical Sciences to matriculation level, and complete at least a half course in each of data received, and
 Brochures from
 range of careers. these subjects at university level, in order to to perform adequately in any of the above fields. how these apply to
 Marine Sciences
 This topic ideally 2. Geological Oceanography includes the study of the coastline, the structure of the seafloor, the processes in which the scientific method
 departments at
 suited for a the ocean basin features developed, and the history of the sediments found.
 Investigate tertiary universities
 project. An 3. Physical Oceanography studies the physics of water. This refers to the causes and characteristics of water
 introduction and movement such as currents, waves and tides. institutions that offer
 a cursory 4. Chemical Oceanography is the study of the composition of water – which illustrates some of its history, its processes Marine Sciences and
 summary should and its interactions. what subjects are
 inspire learners 5. Marine Meteorology is the study of heat transfer and water cycles, as well as ocean-atmosphere relationships. required by each
 to be committed 6. Marine Biology is the study of the variety of ocean life forms, their evolutionary adaptations, their relationships to
 Visit DAF or DEA
 to applying one another, and the ecosystems in which they are found.
 research institutions
 themselves in 7. Other specialisations include Physics, the development of Marine Management Policy, Law, Ocean Engineering
 such as the various
 this course. (related to structures used in the ocean), and Marine Archaeology.
 aquariums
 8. Each marine discipline integrates with the others, making Marine Sciences an ideal subject for teaching
 interdisciplinary skills.
 9. The field informs human interactions with the oceans; these interactions range from resource extraction (minerals,
 Equipment and
 oil or gas) to fisheries. Marine Sciences also guides the sustainable use of these resources, the development of
 methods used by
 marine protected areas, and the non-consumptive use of the ocean.
 oceanographers
 Introduction to Careers in Marine Sciences
 10. A range of marine careers exist: marine biologist, marine geologist, environmental educator, sedimentologist,
 marine and coastal engineer, coastal zone manager, marine architect, ship designer, nature conservation
 professional, aquaculturist, marine-tourism, and fisheries scientist.
 Ocean Exploration: Marine Sciences Careers
 11. The exploration of the ocean contributes to the sustainable future economic potential of coastal areas and
 associated employment opportunities. Such opportunities are related to the extraction of minerals and resources,
 either living or non-living, from the ocean.
 12. Examples should be presented on how the ocean is explored, what equipment is used by South African researchers,
 and deep sea exploration vehicles used elsewhere – such as submarine research vessels.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 29
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 13. Discuss other equipment and methods used by oceanographers (e.g. CTD, XBT, Argo floats, ocean gliders, marine
 animal CTD, moorings, and satellite remote sensing).
 14. For school projects, simple apparatus should be regularly. This could include a surface sampling bottle, Van Doorn
 bottle (for collecting water samples), thermometer, refractometer, pH meter, Secchi disks, Ekman bottom grab
 sampler, Quadrats, and tape measures for transects to measure plants and animals on the shore. Students should
 be able to use this equipment for science expo poster projects. Practical work can be done at a local Marine
 Sciences centre such as an Aquarium Education Centre.

30 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

2. Scientific Inquiry
 Terms 1 Strand – Humans and the Ocean

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 6 hours The Scientific This section provides the basis for the students to develop a Marine Sciences project that demonstrates their skills in Observation Hypothesis A range of
 Method applying the Marine Sciences curriculum. As scientists-to-be, students need to practise observing, inquiring, investigating, testing Theory and truth equipment can be
 should be and researching the natural world. It is here that Marine Sciences as a curriculum subject comes into its own. The oceans are used for this
 thoroughly filled with beauty, fascinating elements and intriguing occurrences. The Marine Sciences project is the opportunity for a Problem statement (initial practical work; for
 discussed in teacher to engender passion for the oceans among Marine Sciences students. inquiry) example, transects,
 this grade. The Scientific Method Secchi disks,
 Hypothesis (allows for
 Learners must 1. Conducting an investigation – one conducts an investigation by collecting evidence from a variety of sources, and water sampling
 predictions)
 have a developing an explanation based on the data, and communicating and defending one’s conclusions. equipment
 thorough 2. Method – the scientific method requires questions leading to a hypothesis that can tested by observations, in turn Experimental design
 understanding (materials and procedure)
 leading to conclusions.
 of the key
 concepts and 3. A theory is proposed on the basis of evidence obtained from research conducted. Data collection
 how to apply Science Process Skills (observations and
 the scientific 1. Observe – use all the senses. measurements)
 method to 2. Question and hypothesise – a hypothesis is a tentative explanation about possible causes or dynamics of a Analysis and interpretation
 their own phenomenon.
 of data or results
 research. 3. Predict – scientific predictions are based on observations, measurements, and relationships between observed (inferences)
 variables.
 4. Use the right terminology – all procedures and reporting are vitally dependent on the precise use of terms. Drawing conclusions
 5. Define variables – identify and distinguish between variables that are controlled (held constant) and those which are (answering the research
 manipulated. question or problem)
 a. Independent (manipulated) variable – the measurement or condition that is regulated by the person doing the Have we proved or
 experiment. disproved the hypothesis?
 b. Dependent (responding) variable – what you measure and observe in response to changes in the independent
 variable. Extension (further inquiry –
 c. Controlled (fixed) variable – these refer to conditions that must be kept the same (held constant) in order to pose new questions that are
 isolate the result; a controlled variable has the potential to vary but is deliberately restricted. related to the original
 6. Perform experiment. question and can lead to
 7. Record results. new investigations)
 8. Analyse results.
 9. Draw conclusions.
 10. Produce a research report and poster – the report should include Introduction, Hypothesis, Method, Results,
 Discussion, and Conclusion.
 Research Skills
 1. Classify – group related objects and ideas together.
 2. Quantify – use numbers and measurements related to time, length, width, volume and ratio.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 31
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 3. Communicate results – describe verbally (text) or visually in tables and graphs.
 4. Interpret, discuss data and draw conclusions – explain an observation.

 Please Note that the Scientific Inquiry is a central Purpose (see 2.3) of this curriculum and should influence each of the
 topics. Although listed as a topic here it should be referred to on an ongoing basis as informing the approach to the
 curriculum.

32 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

3. History of Marine Sciences Research and Ocean Discovery
 Term 1 Strand – Humans and the Ocean

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 1 hour A broad History of Marine Development of Sciences research techniques a brief overview Museums and the Dept. of A range of YouTube
 overview of 1. The development of Marine Sciences exploration and techniques used to collect samples such as Environmental Affairs ware clips and resources
 understanding 2. “wax on a weight” to collect sea floor samples. house for the SA Agulhas . are available in an
 of South 3. CTD water collection mechanisms. Talk by scientists at the Archaeology library
 African 4. sonar development in the earlier 20th Century school to indicate a marine and on the internet.
 Scientists to sciences career and show
 5. Oceanography research. Development of Sediment and Water sampling techniques.
 the Marine the different equipment to George Branch
 6. Development of Satellite imaging.
 Sciences. The the students ..Living Shores of
 history of 7. Sonar and Sea floor mapping Southern Africa
 Marine 8. Satellite imagery
 Science 9. Scuba equipment and submersible craft has made areas of the ocean more accessible for humans
 discovery The Development of Marine Biology as a field (A brief overview)
 should 10. Background and the development of this topic unfolds as the evolution of animals over time
 encourage
 learners to
 make a
 contribution
 themselves in
 the future.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 33
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

4. Life Processes and Chemistry of life
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 The Depth of *Revision and introduction: Define Biology as the study of living things
 1 hour this topic is at a Define living things as organisms fulfilling the criteria for life (life processes); that is: Classify organisms Charts
 level where 1. Movement into living and non-
 2. Respiration living Videos
 learners
 understand 3. Sensitive to external and internal stimuli
 Acronym:
 processes in 4. Growth
 MRS GREN
 organisms for 5. Reproduction
 survival 6. Excretion and other chemical and metabolic processes (and the organism is made
 up of cellular units governed by nucleic acids).
 7. Nutrition

34 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

The Chemistry of life
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 4 hours The Depth of this topic is at a Inorganic Compounds – the main functions of:
 level where learners 1. Water: mention functions in relation to structure
 understand that living 2. Minerals: Elements taken in as inorganic ions and needed in relatively small
 quantities, including Ca, Na, P, Mg, K, S and, in even smaller quantities, trace
 organisms depend on their
 elements including Cu, Zn and Fe. Mention some functions of these minerals.
 environment (inorganic Stress the uptake of minerals as compounds and not elements. These are
 compounds) and elements often also referred to as nutrients taken up by plants.
 from their environment to Review briefly why these substances are needed in plants and animals (i.e. build
 manufacture organic on prior knowledge.) Do not give detail of structure or function – provide only a
 compounds. brief introduction to the molecular make-up of organisms.
 Organic Compounds
 1. Organic molecules are made up of C covalently bonded to other elements,
 almost always with H and, often, also O. Complex organic compounds have
 chains or rings of C atoms, with other elements bonded to them. (The
 definition of organic compounds is not exact and some exceptions exist)
 2. Other elements involved include, but are not limited to, N and P.
 3. Cells are made up of and contain proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic Practical investigations Chemicals for
 acids and vitamins.  Test for food tests
 4. Carbohydrates – monosaccharides (single sugars such as glucose and carbohydrates
 fructose); disaccharides (double sugars such as sucrose and maltose);  Test for lipids
 polysaccharides (many sugars, such as starch, cellulose and glycogen). Their  Test for proteins
 functions in living organisms include providing a source of immediate
 energy; in plants, they also provide storage and structure.
 5. Lipids (fats and oils) – 1 glycerol and 3 fatty acids. The structural
 characteristics lead to their functions in living organisms (eg energy storage,
 structural and temperature insulation).
 6. Proteins – amino acids (C, H, O and N; some have P, S and Fe). The functions
 may be structural, enzymatic, or in some cases hormonal. Proteins are
 sensitive to temperature and pH, with a potential for loss of structure and Homework research- The
 function. Discuss the role of enzymes in breaking down or synthesising name and function of 2or3
 molecules and the influence of temperature and pH on enzyme action. each of water soluble and
 7. Vitamins – Description and general functions eg. fat soluble (A, D, E and K) fat soluble Vitamins
 or water soluble (vitamins B and C).
 8. Mention nucleic acids DNA and RNA. [Detail to follow Cell Biology section.]

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 35
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

5. Cell Biology
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 12 hours Cell biology Molecular Constituents Textbooks
 Cells are mostly made up of proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids and Study plant (onion
 The Depth of this topic is at a water. Discuss the significance of true and colloidal solutions and suspensions epithelium) and animal Charts
 level where learners inside cells. (Briefly revise Grade 9 work on the cell.) (cheek) cells
 understand Cell Structure and Function: The Roles of Organelles Micrographs
  the foundational 1. Cell membrane - Encloses cell contents and enables transport (fluid mosaic Use microscopes and
 knowledge of the model). Movement across membranes- diffusion, osmosis and active stains; student to draw Microscope
 basic unit of life transport; also define Isotonic, Hypertonic and Hypotonic and implications
  to understand the in a marine environment. Experiment to Slides
 basics of early 2. Nucleus- The control centre for cellular function and heredity. Chromatin demonstrate osmosis:
 evolution and material, nuclear membrane, nucleopores, nucleolus. Define Prokaryotic  into hollowed-out Chemicals
  its relationship to and Eukaryotic. potato or raisins
 various metabolic 3. Cytoplasm - storage and circulation of materials.  plasmolysis of onion Electron
 processes. 4. Endoplasmic reticulum (rough and smooth) - transport systems; epithelium micrographs (in
 5. Golgi body/ Dictyosome - assembles secretions. textbooks)
 6. Vacuole, lysosomes, vesicles - storage, digestion and osmoregulation Hay diffusion activity: find,
 7. Ribosomes - protein synthesis. identify and draw different Transparent
 8. Mitochondria - release energy during cell respiration. cell types rulers
 9. Plastids- Chloroplast, Amyloplast/Leucoplast, Chromoplast- production and
 storage of food and pigments. Use micrographs to study Light
 10. Cell wall - support structure in “plant” cells only. other organelles; establish microscopes
 Relate structure and location of organelles to their functions. Look at detailed how to calculate scale
 structure only of nucleus, mitochondrion and chloroplast, so that this work can Hay diffusion ID
 be referred to when dealing with cell division, respiration and photosynthesis. Practise calculations sheets
 Scale and measurements at microscopic level should be explained and
 understood. Potato

 Multicellular organisms- Undifferentiated-tissues-organs-systems… Onion

36 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

6. Origin of Planet Earth
 Strand – Oceanography
 Term 1
 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 1 hour Origin of the 1. Modern theorists attribute the birth of the planet to a collapse of an interstellar cloud of gas and dust about 4.6 billion Discuss: Visit planetarium
 Earth years ago. Is Pluto a planet, and
 2. The gas, dust and other matter were set spinning with increased speed, parallel to the axis of spin. In terms of why is it not classed Videos on origin of
 The Key earth’s solar system, the sun (which is a star) was at the centre of that spinning ‘disk’. as a planet? the earth and plants
 Concepts 3. Self-sustaining nuclear reactions have kept the sun hot: the outer regions cooled, gasses collided and formed particles,
 explains the Wall charts on
 and their gravity pulled other particles towards them.
 detail of the evolution of earth
 4. In our solar system, the sun is orbited by eight planets: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and
 Origin of Mars… was or is there
 Neptune. (Pluto is no longer described as a planet.) The planets have been divided into two groups, a warm group and a
 any life on Mars? National
 Planet Earth cold group. The four warm inner planets are rich in metals and rocky materials, and the four outer planets are called cold
 Geographic videos
 topic and gives giants and mainly contain ice, ammonia and methane.
 on the origin of the
 the overview 5. The early earth consisted of cold matter. This was bombarded by very large and small particles; on impact, a portion of
 earth
 required to their energy was converted to heat. The inner core temperature increased to 1000˚C.
 introduce the 6. Earth is currently dominated by water, but that has not always been the case.
 concepts. 7. The early earth was too small for an atmosphere to develop. Oxygen gas (O2) could not accumulate in the atmosphere
 until more O2 was produced than was absorbed into rocks and other compounds.
 8. On planet earth, the ocean and atmosphere are by-products of heating and cooling processes.
 9. Hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) entered the earth’s atmosphere locked in minerals, from rocks and minerals that
 bombarded the earth. Water was locked in the minerals in the form of hydrogen gas (H2) and oxygen gas (O2). As the
 earth heated and melted, water formed – initially in the form of vapour but eventually condensing to form the oceans.
 10. Nitrogen is believed to have been brought into the earth and its atmosphere as nitrogen-bearing ice in meteorites and
 comets.
 11. From a liquid “soup” organic molecules developed, resulting in the origin of simple chemosynthetic and photosynthetic
 cells.
 12. Photosynthesis produced a greater volume of O2 that was added to the atmosphere.
 13. Later photosynthetic colonies, such as the stromatolites, converted more CO2 to 02.
 14. Earth is just the correct distance from the sun (not too hot, not too cold) for water to predominate in its liquid form,
 enabling life to flourish on the planet.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 37
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

7. Interior of the Earth
 Term 1 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours Interior of the 1. The interior of the earth is studied by: Draw a diagram to Videos
 Earth a) Analysing the material that is extruded from the interior of the earth (eg from volcanoes). illustrate the interior
 b) Recording and observing shock waves such as those produced by earthquakes; the refraction and reflection of of the earth. Label its Charts
 The depth parts inner core,
 required in the these waves show that the interior of the earth is layered. The speed of the waves indicates the density and
 mantle, and Sample rocks (eg
 Interior of the temperature variations of materials. Direction change (due to refraction or reflection) gives valuable lithosphere igneous rock and
 Earth is an information about the materials through which the waves are transmitted. granite)
 overview and c) Analysing meteorite material that has landed on earth. Scientists believe that this material is very similar to
 introduction of
 content for that found in inner layers of the earth.
 reproduction in d) Studying stones from the earth – for example, olivine and pyroxene are similar to the earth’s lithosphere, and
 diagrams or a the metals iron and nickel are similar to the inner core.
 paragraph 2. The earth’s dimensions, density, rotation, gravity and magnetic field are used to determine the interior structures of
 description of
 the earth.
 the
 morphology of 3. The earth is made up of a series of concentric layers:
 the inner a) The lithosphere or crust is the solid outer layer, which reaches a depth of 60 km to 100 km. It is made up of
 structure of various elements, including silicon, aluminium, calcium, magnesium, potassium and sodium.
 planet earth. b) The mantle is a semi-fluid or “plastic-like” layer that is 2900 km below the surface and consists of silicate rocks
 with a high magnesium and iron content. Convection currents exist in this layer, where the intense heat causes
 molten rock to rise and sink again. This convection is the force behind tectonic plate movement and the force
 and material observed in a volcanic lava eruption.
 c) The earth’s core consists of two parts – the liquid outer layer (2180 km thick ) composed mainly of nickel–iron
 alloy; and the solid inner core with a 1200 km radius, composed mainly of iron and metals that have an affinity
 to combine with iron (eg nickel). A substantial amount of sulphur is found in the core. The inner core spins at a
 slightly faster rate than the earth’s surface.

38 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

8. Geological time
 Term 1 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 1 hours Geological time 1. Methods used by scientists to estimate the age of earth have included calculating – Develop a timeline in Timeline printed as a
 a) The time required for oceans to accumulate the current concentrations of salt. table form wall chart for the back
 The depth b) The time required for the earth’s rocks to cool. of the classroom
 required in the See videos illustrating
 c) Measuring radio-active decay of rocks in the crust (radiometric dating).
 Geological Time “Toilet Roll” – unrolled
 2. The earth is an active planet and therefore none of the original rocks exist for research to be conducted to down a passage, with
 topic is for determine the absolute accurate age of the planet. humans arriving only in
 learners to a) Radio-active decay is a method applied to date the age of rock samples that do exist. The oldest known crust the last square of the
 conceptually sample (from Hudson Bay in North America) is 4.3 billion years old. roll
 understand the b) The time taken for half the atoms of an isotope to decay from one element to another element is known as the
 age of the planet half-life. The half-life is used by scientists to date materials in a process called radiometric dating. Compare geological
 and relate this to time on a timeline
 c) Using radiometric dating, scientists have studied rocks recovered from the moon; these were dated at 4.2
 evolution and billion years old. Meteorites that survived entering the earth’s atmosphere and were found on the earth’s Compare the earth’s
 other paleo- surface have been dated at 4.5 to 4.6 billion years old. history to a 24-hour
 references. 3. Scientists refer to geological time when dating materials and when referring to the history of the earth. day, in which humans
 4. The principal divisions of geologic time are called eras: exist only as of 1
 a) Palaeozoic era – era of ancient life minute before midnight
 b) Mesozoic era – era of intermediate life
 c) Cenozoic era – era of recent life.
 5. Eras are subdivided into periods and epochs (these were initially determined by fossil disappearance, and periods
 have been further refined by radiometric dating).

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 39
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

9. Topography of the Ocean Floor and Ocean Basins
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 2 hours Topography of the Ocean Floor Study a profile of the Fishing line
 1. Early navigators measured the depth of the ocean to prevent ships running aground. Ropes weighted with lead ocean basins
 An overview is weights were used. Grease or wax was placed on the weight to gather a sample of sediment from the ocean between one Lead sinker
 required with the bottom. However, this method was inaccurate because the rope stretched. Later, thin wire was used for more
 continent and
 understanding of accurate readings. Up to 8 hours were needed to winch that wire back before each reading was recorded. Videos
 the Topography 2. This time-intensive method meant that prior to the introduction of sonar, only 7000 depth recordings existed. another, and examine
 of the Ocean These were to a maximum depth of 2000 m. the different features
 Maps
 Floor and Ocean 3. From the mid-1920s, echo sounding revolutionised ocean-depth research. This led to the research of the mid-
 Basins to give oceanic ridges, canyons (such as Fish River Canyon), mountain ranges (such as the edges of African Rift Valley) Use a plumb line with
 Charts
 learners a frame and flat plains (such as Serengeti). press stick on a lead
 of reference for 4. Radar is a useful instrument for mapping the ocean floor. For accurate readings and measurements, researchers weight to measure (To illustrate the
 understanding need to be aware of and take into account the variance caused by differences in temperature, salinity, level water depth, and process)
 the sea floor from tides, currents, and changes in atmospheric pressure. collect a sediment
 context. Learners 5. Recently satellites have produced maps of the ocean floor.
 sample
 must be able to 6. Charts show that beneath the ocean surface we find similar shapes to the shapes found on land.
 label a diagram of 7. Identify and label diagrams showing the following features:
 the features a) Continental margins, continental shelf, a shelf break, a slope, a rise, and a submarine canyon
 found on the b) Wave-cut terrace
 ocean bed and c) Continental margins
 have an
 d) Continental rise
 understanding of
 the processes e) Abyssal plain and abyssal hill
 which led to their f) Seamount, guyot atolls and islands, and island arc
 development. g) A barrier reef and a fringing reef
 h) Fracture zone, rift valley and trench
 i) Turbidity currents and turbidites.

 Students should be able to name the ocean basins, international rifts, ridges, banks and seas .

40 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

10. Plate tectonics
 Term 2 Plate Tectonic Strand - Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 2 hour Continental Drift In 1915 Alfred Wegener hypothesised the drifting of continents, based on his observations of Investigate the YouTube clips
 1. The geographic fit of the continental plates ecosystems related to
 Plate tectonics is a Charts (eg
 2. The matching rock types and geology hydrothermal vents.
 topic which should “mountain maker
 3. The matching fossils found on the matching continental margins. How are they similar
 be understood at a earth shaker”)
 greater level of Plate Tectonics to or different from
 understanding than 1. More recently the discovery of the Mid-Ocean Ridge system provided evidence that convection cells exist below ecosystems on land? PBS learning media
 the previous the continents, on which the continents “float”. This led to the concept of sea floor spreading from the Mid
 Oceanography Ocean Ridge as forming the mechanism of plate tectonic movement. Introduce this in GET Globe
 topics. Learners 2. Students should be able to describe the process of continental drift. as it is in the Gr 10
 should be able to 3. Evidence for sea floor spreading includes the match of earthquake zones, to spreading centres and subduction Geography Layered plate
 describe and explain curriculum. However
 zones.
 the processes and more detail is Wooden blocks
 4. Plates are made up of oceanic lithosphere. On their edges there are ridges, trenches and fault zones.
 the possible impacts
 5. An original supercontinent, Pangea, broke up into Gondwanaland and Laurasia over the millennia, and drifted required than the Gr
 on other strands
 around the planet. Further fragmentation and drifting resulted in the current continental pattern. 10 Geography
 and fields of Marine
 Sciences. 6. Evidence for crustal movements includes: curriculum
 a) Polar reversals
 b) Polar wandering Wooden blocks to
 c) Sea floor spreading illustrate the 3
 d) Epicentres of earthquakes different types of
 e) Rift zones and boundaries so that
 f) Volcanic hotspots students can sketch
 the boundary
 Define the following terms:
 movements
 a) Asthenosphere
 b) Mid Ocean Ridge
 c) Subduction zone
 d) Rift zones
 e) Divergent plate boundary
 f) Convergent plate boundary
 g) Transformative plate boundary
 h) Hydrothermal vents
 i) Megaplumes and spreading centre

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 41
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

11. The Ocean Planet – Physical Properties of Water
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 8 hours The depth of The “Water Planet” Change of state and Salt
 study includes The water molecule H2O is made up of two positively charged H atoms and one negatively charged O atom. It has a examples
 water specific shape because the positively charged sides make it a polar molecule. Hydrogen bonds are formed between the Household
 properties molecules. The structure of the water molecule is the reason for water having its unique properties. Density of water: liquids of
 chemical 1. Water is the only substance to exist as a solid, a liquid and a gas in its natural state. cold verses warm various
 composition 2. Changes from one state to another require the adding or removal of large quantities of energy. water viscosities
 of water, the 3. Water has a high heat capacity; it is able to release significant quantities of heat with a small change in
 changes of temperature. ( Refer to the Water Cycle) Density calculations Dish-washing
 state 4. Latent heat is the energy absorbed or released by a substance during a change in its physical state (without liquid
 cohesion, changing its temperature). Examples are the freezing process from water to ice (latent heat of fusion) or the Viscosity
 surface vapourisation process from water to water vapour (latent heat of vapourisation). This energy is expressed in the exploration Food colourant
 tension and amount of joules or calories required per mass of substance undergoing the change of state.
 viscosity as 5. Specific heat is the heat required to raise the temperature of the unit mass of a given substance by a given Surface tension Warm water
 well as the amount, usually one degree. Water has a high heat capacity and requires 4.184 J of heat for 1 g of water to exploration
 dissolving increase 1 °C. (In comparison, copper requires 0.3 J.) Ice
 properties of 6. The surface tension of water is the cohesion between water molecules at the surface.
 water. 7. Viscosity of a liquid is the measure of a liquid’s resistance to flow. The internal friction of a moving fluid is the
 Learners result of its molecular make-up. Syrup at room temperature has a high viscosity as it tends to resist flow, whereas
 should be water has a much lower viscosity than syrup. Water’s low viscosity is the result of its molecular make-up, which
 able to work has very little friction when it is in motion. Viscosity is influenced by temperature.
 with these 8. Water, like most liquids, is nearly incompressible – unlike a diver’s wetsuit (neoprene), which is compressed with
 concepts with depth.
 ease, applying 9. When a person is diving, the pressure of water increases by 1 atmosphere for every 10 m of depth. This fact is of
 these great importance to scuba divers.
 concepts to a 10. Density or mass per unit volume: pure water has a density of 1 g/cm3 at 4 °C.
 range of 11. Sea water has an average salinity of 35 g/cm3.
 settings and 12. The density of water increases with a decrease in temperature; pure water reaches its maximum density at 4 °C.
 contexts. 13. The density of water increases with an increase in salt content.
 14. The effect of pressure on density is small.
 15. Less dense water floats on more dense water.
 16. Water vapour is less dense than air. A mixture of water vapour and air (moist air) is less dense than dry air.
 Define the concepts heat capacity, latent heat, latent heat of fusion, latent head of vapourisation, dew point,
 humidity, and boiling and freezing points for water.

42 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

12. Energy Transmission through Water- Heat
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hour Energy 1. Energy is transmitted in water in three ways: heat, light and sound. How do various birds Videos
 transfer 2. Heat energy is transmitted in three ways: adapt to refraction and
 a) Conduction pressure when diving Charts
 Learners from air into water?
 b) Convection
 should be
 able to apply c) Radiation.
 these 3. Conduction is a molecular process in which heat is applied, causing the molecules to move faster. The rapid
 contexts to movement is passed onto adjacent molecules, which in turn also increase their movement.
 basic settings. 4. Water is a less effective conductor than metals are.
 5. Convection is a density-driven process in which heated fluid moves and carries heat to a new location. Water rises
 when heated and sinks when cooled.
 6. Radiation is the direct transmission of electromagnetic waves from the source to an object. Unlike conduction and
 convection, which require a medium in which to function, radiated heat can move through a vacuum. Oceans are
 heated by solar radiation that is absorbed by the upper layers of the water.
 7. Heat transmission from the ocean surface is inefficient. Much of the heat is reflected off the surface; the rest heats
 the surface water. Some of this heat is moves lower down in the water column by conduction The deeper heated
 water will in turn move upward and float above bands of water colder that it.
 8. The atmosphere, by contrast, is heated from below – by the land or sea. Heat is efficiently transferred to the
 atmosphere by vertical movement of air.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 43
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

13. Energy Transmission through Water- Light and Light Absorption
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 2 hour Energy Light Absorption in Water Refraction Videos
 transmission 1. Sea water transmits the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. exploration
 2. 60% of light is absorbed within the first metre. Glass
 Light 3. 80% is absorbed in the first 10 m.
 Learners should
 4. Only 1% of visible light penetrates to 150 m. Pencil
 be able to apply
 these contexts to 5. No light penetrates below 1000 m.
 basic settings. 6. Not all wavelengths are transmitted equally.
 7. Short wavelengths are transmitted to a greater depth.
 8. The long wave (red) end of the spectrum is lost within the first 10 m.
 9. Objects deeper than 10 meters appear dark as they only receive and reflect blue light; red objects appear
 black.
 10. Silt, plants and suspended particles scatter and absorb light in the water column. Their combined effect
 decreases the amount of light quickly; this decrease of light across a distance is called attenuation.
 11. Light attenuation can be observed and measured with the use of a Secchi disk.
 12. Light is measured by a light meter.
 Refraction
 1. When light passes from air to water, its rays are bent or refracted.
 2. This refraction occurs because light travels more quickly in air than in water, because of the different
 densities of the mediums.
 3. This effect can be compared to a cylinder rolling at an angle off a hard pavement onto a soft sandy surface.
 The section on the sandy surface will move more slowly than the section on the solid surface.
 4. Because of this “bending” of light waves, items seen through the surface of water are not positioned
 where they appear to be.

44 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

14. Introduction to Evolution and Evolution Mechanisms
 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours Evolution – This topic is based on scientific theory using knowledge gained from Geology, fossil records and, more recently, also
 Introduction biochemical research. Those who take exception to this information because of their religious beliefs are encouraged to be Videos Many
 able to discuss evolution from a scientific point of view, but can record their reservations. Alternate points of view can be YouTube Clips
 incorporated into classroom discussion, to maintain a transparent approach. are available
 This important to illustrate all
 topic needs to be The earth is 4.54 billion years old, and life appeared in the sea 3.7 billion years ago. This summary is based on various the defined
 fully understood forms of dating using oldest known rocks in the earth’s crust as well as rock samples from the moon and meteorites. and illustrated
 as it is the basis (Mention plate tectonics and their implications for rock dating.) content on
 upon which the Definition of evolution: The change in genetic makeup of populations of organisms, over time, that gives rise to greater this topic
 Marine Biology is variety and complexity. Charles Darwin coined the term “Descent by modification”.
 taught. Evidence of the process (Provide suitable examples and discussion to illustrate these):
 1. Fossil record – How fossils are formed and types of fossils; comparative dateable strata; increase in complexity and
 diversity; intermediate forms.
 2. Modification by descent – Homologous limbs and organs of related groups indicate common ancestry and change
 over time or conditions.
 3. Biogeographical – Continents separated by continental drift show related but distinct species. (Time frames can be
 applied to these differentiations).
 4. Vestigial structures – for example, leg bones in some whales indicate ancestral organs that have become redundant
 through evolution in a changed environment.
 5. Embryology – Development of (particularly) vertebrate embryos shows similar early stages, with diversification taking
 place later on.
 6. Biochemistry and Genetics – These fields can highlight the degree of relatedness among species. Several similarities
 exist in metabolic pathways and chemistry, indicating common ancestry, whereas the differences indicate points of
 departure between species.
 Alternate points of view to the theory of evolution: (not for examination purposes)
 Potential conflicts between the scientific view and various cultural or religious interpretations of creation should be
 discussed. Suggest Theistic evolution as one possible point of view taken by scientists who are also deeply religious.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 45
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Evolution – Mechanisms
 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology

 Investigation Resource
 Time Depth Key Concepts s s

 2 hours The Depth Natural selection – Several mechanisms were proposed for the process of evolution. The mechanism introduced by Charles Darwin in The Origin of Species
 of this topic (1859) has become accepted as theory and is backed by evidence in nature. Briefly highlight aspects of Darwin’s voyage of discovery.
 is at a level Explanation of natural selection:
 1. Extensive natural genetic variation occurs among members of a population.
 where
 2. More offspring are born than will survive to reproductive age. Simulation
 learners 3. Changes take place in their environment, mostly gradual, but sometimes sudden and catastrophic. Different changes require different strengths or game to
 understand adaptations.
 illustrate
 natural 4. Individuals with the best variations or genetic makeup to survive in the changing environment will live and compete more effectively, to be able to
 natural
 selection on reproduce. (Survival of the fittest) Many
 5. The successful breeders pass on their favourable genes to their offspring. selection
 an YouTube
 introductor 6. With time, and other mechanisms, micro-evolution allows for speciation and macro-evolution for greater changes. Clips are
 Notes: available
 y level and
 a) It is because variation is so important, as a driver of natural selection, that sexual reproduction takes place. to
 speciation b) Certain catastrophic events in the earth’s history caused five mass extinctions, almost wiping life from earth and requiring the evolutionary illustrate
 in the process to start anew each time. It has been proposed that we are now in a sixth, human-induced, mass extinction event (Anthropocene). all the
 introductio Drivers of Speciation: defined
 n of a new A species is defined as a group of natural populations capable of interbreeding to produce viable offspring. (Several other definitions also exist, depending and
 species. on the organisms being studied). illustrate
 1. Geographic (allopatric) – When a group of a species is separated from the main body for long enough, the offshoot group evolves to suit its unique d content
 circumstances, to the point that this group can no longer interbreed with the original group. (Give examples.) on this
 Often isolation is driven by adaptations enabling individuals to avoid competition by moving to a separate habitat or different food source. topic
 2. Reproductive – This implies some sort of isolation of a group initially leading to a change in breeding habits or structures, thus isolating a Find own
 reintroduced group until they speciate. For example: different breeding season, courtship, pheromones, pollinators, or copulatory organs, or infertile examples
 offspring. (Marine examples very rare.) online
 Punctuated Equilibrium – concept was introduced by Stephen J Gould in 1972. Adds to natural selection, suggesting times when conditions are stable with
 YouTube
 very little change in population genetics, interspersed with times of rapid genetic change and speciation following or during a phase of environmental
 change. Evidence in fossil record backs this theory. videos
 Define and discuss:
 1. Convergent and divergent evolution, co-evolution.
 2. Symbiosis and endosymbiosis as further drivers of speciation; macro-evolution

46 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

15. Basic Classification
 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 1 hour The system of two domains, incorporating seven kingdoms, is currently supported. However, several other Slides
 The depth of this suggestions have been proposed. The theory changes constantly with ongoing research, especially comparing Photographs
 topic is at a level genetic makeup of single-celled organisms. The current system recognises: with statistics Photographs
 Two domains: Prokarya and Eukarya (some researchers prefer to separate archaea and bacteria, which
 where pupils
 together form the prokarya domain into two separate domains.) Diagrams
 appreciate and These domains are divided into 7 kingdoms: Choose
 understand: 1. Bacteria –these are very small simple single celled organisms which can display plant-like or animal-like kingdoms Charts
 characteristics. using a key
  Evolutionary 2. Archaea – these organisms are almost identical to bacteria; differences include cell wall chemistry and Video clips
 trends shape of ribosomes.
  The definitive 3. Protista – these are mostly single-cell eukaryotes (can be colonial or multicellular, but never
 differences differentiated); they are either animal-like (protozoa) or plant-like (dinoflagellates) or a mixture. Identify
 between phyla 4. Chromista – this group includes brown algae and has an endosymbiotic origin. animals to
  Specific 5. Fungi – these organisms have filamentous bodies and use saprophytic feeding. different
 adaptations, 6. Plantae – this includes red and green algae and vascular plants. levels, using
 relating to 7. Animalia – these are multicellular eukaryotic heterotrophs. animal photos
 structures to Linnaean system: (with
 functions a) Kingdom statistics) and
  The richness of b) Phylum (animals) / Division (plants) keys
 marine c) Class
 biodiversity d) Order
 and e) Family
 Why it must be f) Genus
 conserved g) Species
 As research continues, there is some movement and subdivision of these groupings.
 Emphasise binomial nomenclature, using genus and species, as well as conventions for publishing (capitals,
 underlining or italics) – for example, Eubalena australis (Southern Right whale); Coracinus capensis (Galjoen-
 our national fish).

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 47
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

16. Evolutionary trends, body plans, symmetry and life patterns
 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology
 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 5 hours Animal section: This section deals with classification and biology of the major heterotrophic/consumer phyla, highlighting Study Examples of
 The Depth of significant marine heterotrophs. It is important that each phylum is not considered in isolation, but seen as part of an Cladograms Cladograms
 this topic is at evolutionary continuum. Point out similarities and differences and how these differences enable survival in more and and
 a level where Phylogenetic Phylogenetic
 demanding environments.
 learners trees of the 7 trees.
 understand Cladograms and Phylogenetic trees- Kingdoms and
 form and The relationship between organisms can be shown using a diagram called a Cladogram- This groups organisms into groups major Animal
 function to of organisms having a similar appearance and shows possible relatedness- similar to a family tree. Another approach, called Phyla, to see
 survive. a Phylogenetic tree, groups organisms based on similar appearance, internal anatomy, physiology, biochemistry and how they
 genetic makeup (when available) and indicates their possible relatedness, as well as a timescale between branches. Point work.
 out that the concept of evolutionary relatedness is an intensively active research field and that new discoveries continue to
 change our existing understanding. Show examples of Cladograms and Phylogenetic trees and point out the differences
 between them. A Phylogenetic tree showing the major animal Phyla should be introduced at this stage and be referred to
 throughout the Zoology phase.
 Revise: Single cell, colonies, tissues, organs, systems. Study photos Pictures
 Marine Explain the following concepts and terms: of marine
 animals: body 1. Tissue layers in distinct arrangements and number (diploblastic and triploblastic). heterotrophs; Photos of
 plans and 2. Body cavity (coelom; pseudo-coelom); acoelomate, pseudo-coelomate and coelomate. Explain these terms with name and marine
 symmetry the aid of diagrams. identify them heterotrophs
 3. Body symmetry: Asymmetrical, Radial and Pentaradial symmetry, Bilateral symmetry, and the implications of
 each. Preserved
 animals or a ,
 Kelp holdfast

 Life Patterns An overview of all phyla to be discussed, and to introduce relevant terminology. Use YouTube
 As animals evolve or adapt to new and changing environments, and through the time represented by the fossil record, we videos
 see animals becoming more complex and specialised in the way they perform their various life functions in more complex extensively
 or demanding environments. Use explanatory diagrams, where relevant. Not too much detail is required in this overview
 because the details will be covered under the relevant phylum. Definitions should be emphasised and added to the glossary.
 1. Support – hydrostatic, exoskeleton and endoskeleton (CaCO3, cartilage and bone).
 2. Locomotion – sessile or sedentary, wriggling, burrowing, swimming, walking and flying.
 3. Nervous coordination – Simple response, nerve net, cephalisation, brain, segmental ganglia and spinal cord,
 sense organs – light, mechanical and chemical (sight, smell, taste, touch/ current and sound).

48 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

4. Nutrition- Source of food, mode of feeding, means to process food: Filter feeder, grazer/browser, scavenger/
 detritivore, predator; external/ internal digestion; phagocytosis, simple gut, through gut, specialised
 compartments.
5. Circulation and internal transport – Diffusion and body plan, coelenteron, blood (with respiratory pigment),
 open system and haemocoel, closed system and vessels.
6. Gaseous exchange (GE) – The ideal GE surface is thin, moist, broad, well ventilated, close to rest of cells or well
 supplied with blood, and enclosed or protected. Includes skin; gills; tracheal system; lungs (bag) with folds/
 compartments, alveoli and tube networks.
7. Excretion and osmoregulation – Explain the need for these processes. Important terms: salt or fresh water,
 osmosis, diffusion, Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), contractile vacuole, flame cells, nephridia, kidneys, salt glands
 and hyperosmotic blood.
8. Thermoregulation – The need for thermoregulation, marine versus land, ectothermic (specific enzyme systems,
 anatomy and behaviour), endothermic (metabolic, insulation and behaviour), counter-current exchange
 mechanisms, homoeothermic versus poikilothermic.
9. Reproduction – Asexual or sexual; sex organs (gametes); uni- and bi-sexual; external and internal fertilisation;
 sperm transfer; ovi-, ovovivi- and vivi-parous; sex change strategy.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 49
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

17. Plankton
 Term 2 Strand – Ecology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 1 hour 1. The term “plankton” refers to large communities of organisms that float on major ocean currents. Video clips Internet
 The depth of this 2. These organisms may be photosynthetic (phytoplankton) or animal-like (zooplankton). are fine for
 topic is at a level 3. The individual organisms range in size from sub-microscopic bacteria through single-celled organisms to multicellular larval this section YouTube
 where pupils animals and substantially larger jellies (which range from 1 mm to 30+ m in size).
 appreciate and 4. Their distribution is normally limited to nutrient rich waters where the phytoplankton can multiply and provide food for the
 understand: rest of the planktonic food chain.
 5. Whilst the resident organisms drift with the current, they can migrate up and down in the water column on a daily basis.
  Evolutionary 6. This daily migration normally occurs in response to light and predation. Most of the organisms migrate downwards during
 trends the day when the surface is brightly illuminated, and upward at night (diel vertical migration).
  The definitive
 7. Planktonic species have many adaptations to achieve this migration, including:
 differences
 between phyla a. An ability to propel themselves, although weakly, to move up to the surface
 b. Neutrally buoyant jelly as a floatation device
  Specific
 c. Storing their food reserves as buoyant fats and oils
 adaptations,
 d. Gas-filled bladders
 relating to
 e. Long spines or frills to increase surface area, all slowing any downward drift.
 structures to
 8. Several small predators (fish, krill and others) will float along with and feed on organisms within the plankton. (These larger
 functions
  The richness of components of the planktonic food chain will become food for large filter feeders such as whales).
 marine 9. Plankton can be further subdivided into:
 biodiversity a. Holoplankton – organisms like jellies and phytoplankton, which spend their entire life cycle in the planktonic
 and community
 Why it must be b. Meroplankton – the larval forms of animals that spend a while in the planktonic community before migrating or
 conserved settling out in their adult form. This includes the larval forms of some echinoderms, crustaceans, worms and many
  fish species.
 10. Communities of heterotrophic plankton may exist at great depth, living on the bodies of dead plankton or nutrient-rich
 particles falling from the surface.
 11. Planktonic communities are widespread, generally limited by nutrient availability and sunlight, although there are other
 contributing factors.
 12. Planktonic organisms play a significant role in:
 a. Oxygen production
 b. Primary and secondary production driving major food chains; it has been estimated that photosynthetic plankton
 represent about 80% of the biomass in the ocean.
 c. Nutrient cycling.

50 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

18. Protists
 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 3 hours Many marine animals undergo a larval stage that involves floating as part of the widespread Photographs, slide Live specimens
 The depth of this oceanic plankton. These larvae feed on single-celled (protists and other) zooplankton and show or videos
 topic is at a level phytoplankton. Fresh plankton
 Study live examples sample
 where pupils
 (aquarium or rock-
 appreciate and Protista pool study) Microscopes
 understand: 1. Protists are therefore at the base of the biggest food chain on earth. Also responsible
 for forming, amongst others, limestone and fossil fuels. Example of a protist Plankton ID sheets
  Evolutionary 2. Single-celled eukaryotic organisms, bound by a membrane and containing fluid,
 ID chart, used to
 trends organelles and chemicals. (Brief revision of cell biology.)
 3. Many protists have CaCO3 as part of their structure. (Investigate potential effects of classify protists in
  The definitive
 ocean acidification.) plankton samples
 differences
 between phyla Marine examples (Illustrate, using photos or diagrams.)
 Collect and identify
  Specific
 adaptations, Forameniferae plankton samples, if
 relating to 4. The cell has an amoeboid nature, pushing out cytoplasmic threads and tubes to feed. possible
 structures to 5. Cells are enclosed by a shell, referred to as a test, made of calcium carbonate or
 functions granules of sand or silt. Size ranges from 100 micrometres up to a few centimetres, at
  The richness of which stage they may be multinucleate cells.
 marine 6. As the cells grow, the test adds on new chambers. The tests can be cylindrical, hollow
 biodiversity tubes or intricate coiled structures (like a snail shell).
 and 7. Most live within the oceanic sediment, but many are planktonic.
 Why it must be 8. Of those, some house symbiotic algae, but most feed on phyto- and zooplankton.
 conserved
 Radiolarians
 9. Range in size from 30 microns to 2mm and have a glass-like silica-rich shell.
 10. Shapes vary from spherical to cone-like or multi-sided, with spine-like extensions to
 increase surface area for buoyancy.
 11. Most are planktonic predators or filter feeders.
 12. Dead cells sink to the ocean floor to form thick layers (up to 100 m deep) known as
 radiolarian ooze.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 51
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

19. Tides
 Term 3 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 1 hour Learners 1. The rise and fall of the sea surface results from the gravitational attractions of the moon Tide tables
 should and the sun acting on the rotating earth. (Explain using diagrams.)
 understand 2. Generally there are two high tides and two low tides per day. These are called semi-diurnal Internet reference to tables
 the process tides.
 of tidal 3. Define: high tide, low tide, tidal range (with extreme examples), tidal datum or mean low Case studies
 variability tide level, neap tide, and spring high and spring low tides. Many YouTube
 and be able 4. Because the moon moves along its orbit as the earth rotates on its axis, a tidal day lasts for Models of Tide changes are Clips are available
 to apply the 24 hours and 25 minutes. available to illustrate all the
 concepts 5. Tidal currents are associated with rising and falling of the tide in coastal waters. defined and
 the 6. The time when the tide turns, and the horizontal movement is zero, is called slack water. illustrated content
 variability of 7. Some areas have only one high and one low tide per day, such as the Gulf of Mexico. These on this topic
 animal are called diurnal tides. (Explain using diagrams.)
 distributions 8. Tides influence human commercial and recreational activities.
 in intertidal
 zonation.

52 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

20. Salinity
 Term 3 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours The effect of 1. During the time that the earth was formed, relentless rainfall landed on the earth’s rocky surface. Salt water and fresh Glass
 salt 2. Volcanic atmosphere gasses – such as chlorine – were dissolved in the rain water. A high content of CO2 water layered
 and sulphur dioxide in the atmosphere created acidic rainfall, and acid rainwater dissolved large experiment Salt water
 Salinity amounts of minerals on earth’s surface and drained away. Salts accumulated over time.
 3. Over millions of years rainwater dissolved salts that drained via rivers into the ocean, where the salts Boil off sea water Fresh water
 Learners accumulated because of water evaporation. Therefore the sea is salty. reducing solution to salt
 should have a 4. Water has been called the universal solvent as it has an excellent ability to dissolve a wide range of crystals Food colouring
 basic materials because of its polar nature.
 understanding 5. The salt molecule (Na+Cl-) consists of one atom of sodium (Na+), which has a positive charge, and one Hot plate or Bunsen
 which when atom of chlorine (Cl-), which has a negative charge. Salts dissolve easily in water because of the polarity burner
 applied should of H2O. In solution, the molecule dissociates and sodium ions are surrounded by the negatively charged
 lead to an O end of the water molecule. The chloride ions are surrounded by the positively charged H 2 end of the
 ability to water molecule.
 explain 6. When salts are dissolved in water, the density of water increases because salts have greater density
 concepts such than water.
 as 7. The average density of water at 4 ͦC is 1.0278 g/cm3. The open ocean has an average salt content of
 Thermohaline 35 g/kg.
 circulation. 8. If two solutions of differing properties come into contact, they will not mix easily because of their
 differing densities.
 a. Haloclines are separate layers of different salinity.
 b. Thermocline is a layer of rapidly changing temperature.
 c. Pycnocline a layer of rapidly changing density. The pycnocline includes both the halocline
 (salinity gradient) and the thermocline (temperature gradient). The pycnocline refers to a
 rapidly changing density with depth, because of rapid changes in temperature and salinity.
 d. Apply these concepts by exploring thermohaline circulation.
 9. The separate “pockets” of water are commonly seen in estuaries where fresh, salt, warm and cold water
 mix.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 53
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

21. The Atmosphere
 Term 3 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours The depth of 1. Earth is surrounded by two “envelopes” – a fluid one, the ocean; and a gaseous one, the atmosphere. Greenhouse
 the content 2. The sun heats the earth, which radiates some heat to the atmosphere and the ocean. gases
 listed in the 3. Oceans and land absorb heat better than the atmosphere does. Oceans also retain their heat better than land
 Key
 does, where for example heat is lost from some rock types relatively quickly. This difference results from the
 Concepts.
 Learners specific heat capacity (SHC) of water in relation to the SHC of air.
 should know 4. SHC of water is what dampens seasonal changes in aquatic and coastal environments.
 and be able 5. Heat is transferred from land into the atmosphere, which sets air in motion.
 to apply 6. The heat transfer produces surface winds and transfer of heat from one part of the atmosphere to another.
 these 7. Both winds and currents transport heat.
 concepts to Many YouTube
 8. The dynamic interaction between atmosphere and ocean constantly modifies itself. The atmosphere and ocean Clips are available
 various
 are constantly moving, driven by density changes (in the air or water) and gravity. One system drives the other. to illustrate all the
 problems.
 Layers and Structure of Atmosphere defined and
 1. Air is composed of a range of gasses (N, O2, CO2, Ar, Ne, He, H and O3). The most common are nitrogen, oxygen, illustrated content
 carbon dioxide and water vapour. on this topic
 2. Air pressure is the force with which air presses towards the earth’s centre.
 3. The atmosphere’s layers are named the troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere and thermosphere. Most
 clouds are found in the troposphere. (Illustrate using diagrams.) See NOAA
 4. Temperatures in the higher mesosphere and thermosphere decrease with increasing altitude. resources
 5. The earth’s climate changes naturally. There are natural and human forces which affect the climate, and
 recently human causes have sped up the extent to which climate is changing.
 6. One of the major factors causing climate change is an increase in greenhouse gases such as CO2. This increase in
 the CO2 layer traps outgoing long-wave radiation, creating a greenhouse effect and global warming.
 7. The ozone layer has been substantially depleted during the last century because of the release of chloro-
 fluorocarbons (CFCs) into the atmosphere. A loss of ozone results in more ultraviolet rays reaching the earth’s
 surface. With the banning of CFC use, this process is slowly being reversed.

54 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

22. Air Movement on Earth’s surface
 Term 3 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 3 hours Wind and air Air Movement on Earth’s Surface Coriolis Effect Videos
 movement 1. If the earth did not rotate, air movement would nevertheless occur because of uneven heating of the land
 surface. Drawings of
 Learners 2. The Coriolis Effect (resulting from earth’s rotation) has a significant effect on the movement of air within the different cells and
 atmosphere. their associated
 should 3. Use diagrams to illustrate the following:
 understand this wind bands
 a) Hadley’s cell, Ferrell’s cell and polar cells
 content as an b) Wind bands associated with the cells
 overview and c) Zones of descending air produce doldrums (eg horse latitudes).
 4. Seasonal differences result in the wind bands appearing to migrate north and south as seasons change (use
 as an diagrams to illustrate.)
 introduction to 5. Explanation of the seven different isobaric systems include ‘cut off lows’ and the weather related thereto.
 South African 6. Basic cloud and fog development with recognition of the various types.
 7. Interpretation of the weather systems affecting Southern Africa (synoptic charts and analysis charts)
 weather
 8. Understanding of the Beaufort wind scale and the Geostrophic wind scale.
 systems as the 9. Storm surges occur when storm-elevated sea surfaces reach the shore, resulting in flooding.
 content could Storms in the oceans (Tropical Revolving Storms or Cyclones; ) and Mid Latitude Depressions
 be applied to
 1. Tropical Revolving storms including cyclones, hurricanes, and water spouts contain strong rotating winds that
 other strands. cause damage and affect shipping.
 2. Formation: storms such as cyclones or hurricanes occur over warm water in tropical oceans far from jet
 streams. Mid latitude depressions (MLD) occur at the frontal zone between warm moist tropical maritime air
 and cold dry polar maritime air. Vortexes occur with fronts in this latitude band. They predominantly are west
 to east moving with the jet streams.
 3. Size: Cyclones are large, up to 1600 km across. MLD’s are very large and are often associated with a family of
 depressions. In the southern ocean the primary is south and east of the secondary (ies) depressions. Warm
 fronts and cold fronts cover many nautical miles in size.
 4. Duration: Cyclones and MLDs can last up to 3 weeks.
 5. Wind speed: Cyclones have a lower speed, around 320 km/h. MLDs move faster, more than 480 km/h.
 6. Occurrences: Indian Ocean cyclones move from the warm tropical waters towards Mozambique in late summer.
 7. They travel south west and recurve at about 22° S latitude and lose energy over colder water or when passing
 overland. Avoidance is important for ships especially small vessels such as yachts Roughly 10 hurricanes occur in
 West Atlantic per year (thus not a South African phenomenon).
 8. Warning time: Cyclones, MLDs and hurricanes several days.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 55
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Orographic Effect
 1. As winds move across the ocean, water is absorbed. Mountains along the coast deflect on-shore winds
 upwards. The air cools, causing condensation, and precipitation occurs on the windward side of the mountain.
 2. On the lee side of the mountain, air is dry. This is called a rain shadow. (eg George is wet, Oudtshoorn is dryer,
 and Prince Albert is the driest. Use diagrams to illustrate.)
 3. The Andes Mountains in South America are another example of a range that develops a rain shadow on the lee
 side of the mountain range – in this case, the Atacama Desert. (Use diagrams to illustrate.)

56 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

23. Chart work – Location Systems and the Shape of Earth
 Term 3 Strand – Oceanography
 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 4 hours Navigational The shape of the earth Graph illustrating
 skills and 1. As the earth cooled after its formation, gravity and rotational forces resulted in it forming into a geoid (almost proportion of land
 charts is dealt spherical) shape. in northern versus
 with on an 2. The average radius of the earth is 6371 km. southern
 introductory 3. There is a slight bulge of 21.3 km at the equator. hemispheres
 level. 4. Most of the surface land mass on the planet is found in the northern hemisphere.
 5. The shape of the earth is relatively smooth, with its highest point Mt Everest being 8840 m above sea level. The Interpretation of
 deepest ocean trench, the Mariana Trench, is 11 000 m deep. bathymetry charts

 Location systems Use Skype in the
 1. When we study the earth, and the oceans in particular, exact positions on the planet need to be identified. The classroom to Bathymetry
 It is a topic location system used is lines of latitude and longitude. connect with charts
 dealt with in a. Lines of latitude are called “parallels” and begin in the centre, at the equator, which is zero degrees latitude students at schools Compass
 other subjects. (0°). The poles are at 90°, with North Pole at 90° N and South Pole at 90° S. in different time Globe
 The most b. Lines of latitude are determined by the angle between the centre of the earth and the equator and an zones Briefly
 relevant imaginary line to the edge of the earth. introduce
 content is to c. Lines of longitude (“meridians”) are drawn at right angles to lines of latitude. Zero degrees latitude (0°) is a equipment
 identify grid line drawn from the North to South Poles through Greenwich Village near London, UK. This line is called the Thermometer
 references of Greenwich Meridian, and the 180° meridian is called the International Date Line. This is not a straight line, Barometer
 Marine because it is the line used to divide one day from another. Certain Pacific islands falling under the same Hygrometer
 Sciences country need to fit into the same day. Anemometer
 studies. 2. Lines of longitudes are named as the angular change, east or west, from 0°. GPS
 Charts and maps show the planet’s three-dimensional surface as if projected onto a flat surface. The task of a
 mapmaker or cartographer is to produce a representation onto a flat chart that is most accurate, convenient for use,
 and the least distorted. Use GPS, Google
 1. Any flat map or chart will be a distorted view of a spherical surface. Charts are drawn by placing an imaginary Map and time
 lamp in the centre of the earth and projecting the image of the globe onto a flat chart surface. Different clocks on cell
 projections are obtained by different positions of a) the light source inside the globe and b) the chart. phones to illustrate
 2. Most maps are one of three basic projections: cylindrical projection, conic projection, and tangent plane how easily time
 projection. The page is either wrapped around the cylinder, in a cone (with the page in contact with the zones and location
 equator), or flat as a tangent plane projection. These projections show land area being disproportionately larger systems can be
 in the upper latitudes. As a result, continents such as Europe, Asia and North America look far larger in area on applied.
 the chart than Africa, which contains large areas of land at the equator. On the Peters projection, Africa Geocache
 appears far larger than Europe and North America. The Peters projection is a computer-generated projection exercises/ games to
 with land proportionately illustrated on a map. reinforce
 3. GIS is used extensively of recent times to record localities at which Marine Sciences research occurs concepts.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 57
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

24. Ecological concepts introduction and Carbon, Nitrogen and Phosphate
 Term 3 Strand – Ecology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 4 hours Ecology Video clips are Internet
 The Depth of this An ecosystem is defined as a community of organisms that interact with each other and the particular physical fine for this
 topic is to environment in which they live. Ecologists study ecosystems in detail. section, as a rocky YouTube
 introduce the 1. An ecosystem is linked by a flow of energy and materials through the non-living (abiotic) as well as shore habitat will
 components of be investigated in
 living (biotic) sections of the system.
 an ecosystem and detail
 understand some 2. The biotic components include organisms from several trophic levels:
 of the complex a. Producers – autotrophs, mainly phytoplankton and seaweeds.
 interactions b. Consumers – heterotrophs (herbivores, carnivores, omnivores, detritivores) that ingest
 between them. other organisms, using various feeding strategies (eg grazing, browsing, hunting, scavenging
 While some and filter feeding).
 concepts will be c. Decomposers – saprophytic heterotrophs (mainly bacteria and fungi) break down organic
 dealt with
 compounds after organisms die. This releases nutrients for use again by primary producers.
 separately, it is
 important for 3. Feeding relationships in an ecosystem can be indicated as food chains or webs, or graphically as food
 learners to pyramids of number, biomass or energy.
 combine them 4. Inorganic nutrients (eg carbon, nitrogen and oxygen) are cycled through ecosystems in a nutrient cycle
 when looking at (Detail is provided in sections on nutrient cycle.)
 specific 5. Energy is converted to food by producers and passed along the food chain, with each level converting
 ecosystems. some of the energy to other forms in order to stay alive, until eventually the energy (food) is used up.
 Thus we refer to – and can graphically represent – energy flow through an ecosystem.
 6. Several interactions occur between organisms in an ecosystem, including inter- and intraspecific
 competition, and predation.
 7. Symbiotic relationships also occur (parasitism, commensalism and mutualism).
 (Unpack these terms and concepts with marine examples – eg parasitic isopods and fish tapeworms,
 remora and shark, pilot fish and shark, cleaner wrasse, and clown fish and anemone. Discuss
 coevolution as an extension of symbiosis.)
 8. Five South African marine ecosystems are studied: the open ocean, rocky shores, sandy shores, kelp
 forests and estuaries.

58 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Nutrient Cycling 1 Carbon
 Term 3 Strand – Ecology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 Total of The Depth of this
 4 hours topic is to The Carbon Cycle
 For introduce the Many YouTube
 Carbon, components of an The rate at which the oceans absorb CO2 is controlled by: Clips are
 N and P ecosystem and 1. Water temperature. available to
 understand some 2. pH illustrate all the
 of the complex defined and
 3. Salinity.
 interactions illustrated
 between them. 4. The availability of calcium and carbonate ions. content on this
 While some 5. Biological processes, such as organic material dropping to the ocean floor topic
 concepts will be 6. Circulation patterns that transfer CO2 to the deep ocean and back to the surface.
 dealt with 7. The transfer of carbon from CO2 to organic material occurs by photosynthesis at the
 separately, it is sea surface. The CO2 becomes part of organic matter. When the organic material dies it
 important for sinks to the bottom of the ocean; when it decomposes, the CO2 is released. The
 learners to
 increase of CO2 can potentially increase the acidity of the ocean.
 combine them
 when looking at 8. This process is referred to as a biological pump. (Illustrate this cycle with a flow
 specific diagram.)
 ecosystems.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 59
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Nutrient Cycling- 2 Nitrogen
 Term 3 Strand – Ecology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 Total of 4 The Depth of The Nitrogen Cycle [NOAA
 hours this topic is to Education kits]
 For introduce the Nitrogen is needed for the formation of amino acids and proteins. Air contains a lot of nitrogen (approx.
 Carbon, N components of 78%) but is unreactive and cannot be used directly by plants to make protein. Plants absorb nitrogen only [CMORE Hawaii
 and P an ecosystem in the form of nitrates, and specific processes are required to convert nitrogen to nitrates. fact sheet]
 and understand
 some of the
 1. Nitrogen gas enters the ocean at the ocean surface.
 complex
 2. By nitrogen fixation, dissolved nitrogen gas is taken up by microbes, which convert it into
 interactions
 between them. ammonium (NH4), a more useful form. In this way nitrogen becomes accessible for absorption by
 While some organisms and enters the biological cycle.
 concepts will be 3. By assimilation, ammonium is consumed by microorganisms and nitrogen becomes incorporated
 dealt with into the cells of living organisms.
 separately, it is 4. In some cases, microbes absorb nitrite and nitrate, leading to another form of assimilation.
 important for
 Microbes die and decompose, releasing ammonium and –
 learners to
 combine them a) small particles which contain particulate organic nitrogen (POC)
 when looking at b) dissolved organic nitrogen (DON)
 specific into the water column.
 ecosystems. 5. In a two-step process called nitrification, certain microbes convert ammonium into nitrite (NO2)
 and then into nitrate (NO3). And so nitrates are released into the ocean for absorption by
 photosynthetic organisms.
 6. In a process called remineralisation, many organisms consume POC and DON, converting them
 back into ammonium.
 7. To complete the cycle, in a process called denitrification some microbes convert nitrate and
 nitrites back into nitrogen gas. (Illustrate this cycle with a flow diagram.)

60 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Nutrient Cycling- 3 Phosphates
 Term 3 Nutrient Cycling: Phosphates Strand - Ecology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 Total of 4 The Depth of this The Phosphate Cycle
 hours topic is to Many YouTube
 For introduce the Phosphorous is an essential element for life. It is an important part of the ATP molecule, which stores Clips are
 Carbon, N components of an and gives each living cell its energy. Phosphorus is also found in DNA and RNA, which provide all available to
 and P ecosystem and information for cells and organisms to function and reproduce. Phosphorus is thus needed for every illustrate all the
 understand some defined and
 organism to survive.
 of the complex illustrated
 interactions content on this
 The phosphorus cycle describes the process in which phosphorus travels from submarine and
 between them. topic
 While some continental surface rocks, through ecosystems to living organisms.
 concepts will be
 dealt with 1. Phosphorus does not exist in the environment in its elemental form but rather as phosphates.
 separately, it is 2. Phosphates are found in rocks.
 important for 3. Weathering results in phosphorus being released and washing into soil and rivers.
 learners to 4. Phosphorus enters the ocean through run-off from land, animal waste and decaying animals.
 combine them 5. Phosphorous in soil is absorbed by land plants and passed on to herbivores and carnivores.
 when looking at 6. Most aquatic producers obtain phosphorus directly from the water they live in.
 specific 7. Some land animals absorb phosphorus directly from drinking water.
 ecosystems. 8. Phosphorus is returned to the environment through animal waste and decaying animals.
 (Illustrate this cycle with a flow diagram.)

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 61
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

25. Porifera
 Term 3 Strand – Marine Biology

Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
4 hours -Refer to the Phylogenetic tree to place this Phylum in its Evolutionary context. Stereo
 The depth of this Porifera (sponges) Photographs, slide show or microscope
 topic is at a level 1. Mainly marine, some freshwater. videos
 2. Asymmetrical.
 where pupils
 3. A loose collection of partially specialised cells forming a multicellular organism. Study live examples
 appreciate and 4. Very simple tissue level of organisation. (aquarium or rock-pool
 understand: 5. Outer dermal cells for protection. study)
 6. Middle jelly mesenchyme layer:
  Evolutionary a. Amoeboid cells to engulf particles. Observation of as many live
 trends b. Spicule cells produce spicules. species as possible
  The definitive c. Spicules form structural support or a skeleton. Spicules are made up of CaCO3, silica or OR
 differences spongin (wiry threads of silk-like material). arrange a lesson or course
 between phyla 7. Spicules make sponges spiky to small grazers and very unpleasant to eat. Colour acts as a warning. with nearest aquarium
  Specific 8. Grow continuously.
 adaptations, 9. Huge variety. Use one specific locally
 relating to 10. Shape and skeletal material are used to classify Porifera. available example.
 structures to 11. Inner layer of collar cells. Incorporate into ecosystem
 functions 12. Sponges are very effective ecological filters; they suck water into their pores and collar cells filter out field trips
  The richness of food.
 marine 13. Protection: Dermis and spicules. Isolate spicules for study
 biodiversity and 14. Support: Mesenchyme with spicules. under microscope, by
 Why it must be 15. No nervous control. dissolving sponge
 conserved 16. Nutrition: Filter-feed using collar cells, which also ensure a constant flow through pores and out. fragments in nitric or
 17. Transport: Diffusion to all other cells. sulphuric acid
 18. Reproduction: Gametes form in mesenchyme, eggs are fertilised and then released. Multicellular
 larvae swim for a few days then settle and crawl to a favourable substrate. Some sponges are
 hermaphroditic.
 19. Asexual reproduction can happen by fragmentation or budding.

62 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

26. Cnidaria- Introduction and Cnidarian Classes
 Term 3 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 3 hours -Refer to the Phylogenetic tree to place this Phylum in its Evolutionary context. Photographs, slide Videos
 The depth of this Use labelled diagrams to illustrate detail. Use a sandy anemone as an example. show and videos
 topic is at a level 1. “Cnidaria” means “nettles” in Greek.
 2. The typical body form is a polyp, but some classes have a life-cycle incorporating a medusa form. Observation of as
 where pupils
 3. Radially symmetrical – ideal for sessile or planktonic existence. many live species as
 appreciate and possible, or arrange
 understand: 4. Body plan – Diploblastic. Ectoderm, mesoglea and endoderm. Specialised cells within these layers
 lesson or course
 perform all necessary life functions. with nearest
  Evolutionary 5. Hydrostatic support is provided or assisted by: aquarium
 trends a. Fluid filled body cavity/gut (Coelenteron)
  The definitive b. Longitudinal and circular muscles (Musculo epithelial- and digestive cells). Use a specific
 differences c. Gel mesoglea locally available
 between phyla example.
 6. Nervous coordinationl occurs through a nerve net in the mesoglea (Sensory cells in ecto- and endoderm).
  Specific
 7. Nutrition:
 adaptations, THEME- Increasing
 relating to a. Stinging cells (Nematocysts) and other specialised cells capture prey. surface area.
 structures to b. Mouth (only body opening)and pharynx assist in feeding and maintaining hydrostatic integrity. Prepare cardboard
 functions c. External and internal digestion due to gland cells and musculo-digestive cells. cylinders about
  The richness of d. Internal folds increase the surface area. from an A4 sheet
 marine e. Digestion products transported to all other cells by diffusion. (landscape format).
 biodiversity Now have the
 8. Gaseous exchange- O2 diffuses from centre and outside.
 and pupils fold A4 paper
 9. Reproduction:
 Why it must be sheets to corrugate
 conserved a. Can be asexual through fragmentation or budding, or gametes may be formed from clusters of them and see how
  interstitial cells and then released. Resulting larvae are termed planula larvae and they crawl or many can be fitted
 swim using cilia. around the inside of
 b. Some examples have a complex multi-stage life cycle. the cylinder.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 63
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Cnidarian classes
 Term 3 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 3 hours Briefly discuss features and examples of anemones, colonial anemones, zoanthids, soft coral, hard coral, sea fan, Photographs, slide Videos
 The depth of this jellies and hydroids. (Provide photos or diagrams for each.) show and videos
 topic is at a level 1. Hydrozoa
 where pupils a. Hydroids – Microscopic polyps growing together from a fern-like or feathery central stalk, some giving rise to
 Study live examples
 appreciate and a medusa stage known as hydromedusae.
 (aquarium or rock-
 understand: b. Hydroids include modified polymorphic colonies such as bluebottles.
 pool study)
 2. Scyphozoa and Cubozoa
  Evolutionary 1. Jellies – Also referred to as jellyfish. Observation of as
 trends 2. Normally have a complex life cycle with polyp and medusa stages. many live species as
  The definitive (Discuss jelly structure and life cycle stages, using diagrams.) possible, or arrange
 differences 3. Anthozoa lesson or course
 between phyla  Anemones – This is the chosen example, already discussed. with nearest
  Specific  Colonial anemones – Single anemones, generally small and growing very close to each other to form aquarium
 adaptations, extended carpets.
 relating to  Zoanthids – Closely resemble colonial anemones but are joined together by a fleshy membrane, the Use a specific
 structures to coenoenchyme. Limited to sub-tropical shorelines, where they form broad carpets in the intertidal zone. locally available
 functions Like hard coral they harbour zooxanthellae. example, but
  The richness of  Soft coral – Several polyps grow from a central base made up of same two body layers and mesoglea (eg ensure ability to
 marine purple soft coral or sunburst soft coral). recognise major
 biodiversity  Hard coral – Typical in warm tropical oceans. Colonial polyps build CaCO3 cups to live in, where they form sub-groups or
 and large intricate structures. Different corals are classified according to the shape of the structures built. classes and defining
 Why it must be Nutrition is derived from captured zooplankton, mainly mutualistic zooxanthellae. characteristics
 conserved  Sea Fans – Colonial polyps grow from a stiff central branching protein rod.
 Incorporate into
 Ctenophora – This phylum (common name comb jellies) is very similar to Cnidaria. Sizes range from a few ecosystem field
 millimetres to over a metre. trips
 1. The adult has a thin tissue layer around a jelly mesogloea, with a tissue-lined coelenteron in the middle.
 2. Many have tentacles covered in sticky cells, but there are no stinging cells present.
 3. Distinct bands of cilia, used for swimming, run down the length of the body (hence the name).
 4. (Photos or diagrams, to be able to identify an example.)

64 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

27. Platyhelminthes
 Term 3 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 3 hours Refer to the Phylogenetic tree to place this Phylum in its Evolutionary Photographs, slide show and videos Many YouTube Clips are
 context. available to illustrate all
 The depth of this (Use labelled diagrams to illustrate detail.) Study live examples (aquarium or rock-pool study) the defined and
 topic is at a level illustrated content on this
 1. Latin – “Flat worm”. Explain significance of flat structure with
 where pupils Observation of as many live species as possible, or topic
 regard to surface-area-to-volume ratio and transport of gasses. arrange lesson or course with nearest aquarium
 appreciate and 2. Bilateral symmetry.
 understand: 3. Body plan – Multicellular, triploblastic (mesoderm), acoelomate. Use a specific locally available example, but ensure
 a) Ectoderm specialised to protect and aid in locomotion. ability to recognise major sub-groups or classes and
  Evolutionary defining characteristics
 b) Endoderm specialised to aid nutrition.
 trends
  The definitive c) Mesoderm takes over as the hydrostatic medium; also houses
 Incorporate into ecosystem field trips
 differences organs.
 between phyla 4. Free-living and parasitic examples exist. NEW THEME- Surface Area to volume ratio
  Specific 5. Locomotion – Free living examples are motile examples move using Use two sponge sheets of different widths and cut
 adaptations, cilia and slime or swim. them into sizes of similar volume. Establish the surface
 relating to 6. Nervous control – Nerve network, cerebral ganglion or areas of each and put them into shallow trays holding
 structures to the same volumes of water, for 30s. Then relate
 cephalisation. Eye spots; also senses touch, current, temperature
 functions surface area to the volume of water absorbed.
 and chemicals.
  The richness of
 marine 7. Nutrition – Extrudable muscular pharynx sucks food into branched
 biodiversity gut.
 and 8. Gaseous exchange through skin and diffusion.
 Why it must be 9. Excretion – Inward folds of ectoderm, causing tubule network
 conserved linked to flame cell clusters.
 10. Reproduction – Asexually by fragmentation or budding. Sexual:
 most are hermaphrodite, with internal fertilisation. Eggs hatch as
 miniature adults or a planktonic larval form.
 .

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 65
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

28. Other Unsegmented Worms
 Term 4 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 2 hours (These phyla need not be dealt with in detail. Photos and diagrams can be used to ensure students can identify them.) Photographs, Videos
 The depth of this Nemerteans are commonly called ribbon worms: slide show and
 topic is at a level 1. Generally found in gravel and sediment in intertidal zones. videos
 where pupils 2. Size varies from a few millimetres to many centimetres long, and exceptions can be several metres long.
 3. Tend to be long, thin and flat
 appreciate and Study live
 4. Have a through gut.
 understand: 5. Have a coelom modified to form a simple circulatory system. examples
 6. Have a space above the foregut, called a rhynchocoel, which houses a sticky eversible – and sometimes branched – (aquarium or
  Evolutionary sticky proboscis. rock-pool study)
 trends 7. The proboscis is used like a net to capture prey or to filter feed.
  The definitive 8. Most move like flatworms, with cilia on a layer of mucus. Observation of as
 differences Nematodes are commonly called roundworms: many live species
 between phyla 1. Very abundant in marine and estuarine sediments, also damp soil and as parasites and commensals in many plants as possible, or
  Specific arrange lesson or
 and animals.
 adaptations, course with
 relating to 2. Size is generally less than 1 mm to a few millimetres long, but exceptions can be several centimetres. nearest aquarium
 structures to 3. Have tubular bodies tapering at each end.
 functions 4. A pseudocoelom extends the length of the body. Use a specific
  The richness of 5. Have a through gut and feed on liquids or microscopic animals. locally available
 marine 6. Movement is by means of snake-like wriggling. example, but
 biodiversity Sipunculids are commonly known as peanut worms as they resemble peanuts in their dormant state. ensure ability to
 and recognise major
 1. They are found in gravel and sediments and below sedentary organisms, like mussel beds, in intertidal zones.
 Why it must be sub-groups or
 conserved 2. Size is generally 1cm–5cm. classes and
 3. They have an eversible tubular extension (an introvert); can be extended to ingest food with the mouth at its end. defining
 4. They have a coiled, U-shaped through-gut. characteristics
 5. The introvert also enables them to move forward by anchoring the extended front and dragging their body along.
 Chaetognaths are commonly called arrow worms: Incorporate into
 1. Arrow worms are significant predators in planktonic communities, where most of them live. ecosystem field
 trips
 2. Range in size from about 2mm to 12cm.
 3. They have a transparent, tubular, worm-like body with a distinct head and tail.
 4. They have a through gut.
 5. Around the head are several tooth-like chaetae with which they capture prey. The chaetae can be covered by a flap of
 skin while they swim.
 6. They have lateral and caudal fins; extensions of the epidermis resembling those of bony fish.

66 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

29. Annelida and Annelid Groups
 Term 4 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 4 hours Segmented worms Photographs, slide
 The depth of this -Refer to the Phylogenetic tree to place this Phylum in its Evolutionary context. show and videos
 topic is at a level (Use labelled diagrams to illustrate detail.)
 This phylum represents the start of several revolutionary characteristics. Study live examples
 where pupils
 1. There are three major classes; marine examples fall mainly in the class Polychaetae – around 4000 species have (aquarium or rock-
 appreciate and been identified, both sedentary and free living. pool study)
 understand: 2. Symmetry – Bilateral.
 3. Body plan – Triploblastic, with a split mesoderm to make it coelomate. Observation of as
  Evolutionary 4. The coelom is fluid-filled to provide a hydrostatic skeleton and organ space. many live species as
 trends 5. Segmentation possible, or arrange
  The definitive a. Allows for coordination of different parts of the body. lesson or course with
 differences b. Each segment can be operated independently. nearest aquarium
 between phyla 6. The ectoderm forms a specialised glandular skin (producing mucus) with a protective cuticle.
  Specific 7. Locomotion – Free-living forms move around using a combination of independent segmental contractions and Use a specific locally
 adaptations, parapodial bristles. available example,
 relating to 8. Nervous coordination – but ensure ability to
 structures to recognise major sub-
 a. Compared with the flatworm, segmented worms have more advanced cephalisation with better sense
 functions groups or classes and
  The richness of organs. defining
 marine b. They also have a larger cerebral ganglion. characteristics
 biodiversity c. A double ventral nerve cord links individual segmental ganglia.
 and 9. Nutrition – Incorporate into
 Why it must be a. Front segments are modified for various modes of feeding; broad fan-like surfaces in filter feeders. ecosystem field trips
 conserved b. Long sticky threads; wide range of bristle- or tooth-filled jaws in predators to catch and chew prey. Live worms
 Observe earthworms
 c. A through gut with specialised compartments and glands enables effective digestion.
 or (preferably)
 10. Circulation – A closed blood system, with contractile arteries to ensure effective internal transport. Pseudonereis or
 11. Gaseous exchange – Skin, parapodia with segmental gills, extra-oral gills, respiratory pigment. wonderworm
 12. Excretion – Most segments have a pair of protonephridia, which clean coelomic fluid and blood; excrete waste
 to outside through pores. Virtual or YouTube
 13. Reproduction – video on dissection
 a. Some asexual regeneration of segments or budding can occur.
 b. Generally unisex, with specialised sex organs or segments dedicated to gamete production.
 c. Often have synchronised spawning. First released gametes produce a scent (gamone) stimulating other
 individuals to spawn. Swarming may also occur.
 d. Eggs hatch as Trochophore larvae, which float as plankton before sinking to metamorphose into adults.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 67
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Annelid groups
 Term 4 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 Part of the Annelid examples Discuss and be able to identify: Study photographs Live animals
 time 1. Pseudonereis (mussel worm) or other free-living example; identify parapodia, bristles and jaws. and, ideally, live
 allocation 2. Tangleworm – Lives in mucous tubes. Identify feeding threads and gills. examples
 for 3. Tube worm or fan worm – Produces leathery or sandy, calcareous tubes. Feathery outgrowths around the
 Annelida mouth act as filter feeding mechanisms and gills.

 Time

68 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

30. Arthropoda- Introduction and Marine Arthropod Groups
 Term 4 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 6 hours Revise life patterns and classification Photographs, slide
 The depth of this -Refer to the Phylogenetic tree to place this Phylum in its Evolutionary context. show and videos
 topic is at a level 1. Although this is by far the most successful and diverse group of animals, the basic body plan and definitive
 features are universal. (Use labelled diagrams to illustrate detail.)
 where pupils
 2. Symmetry and plan – Most are bilaterally symmetrical, all are triploblastic coelomate. Study live examples
 appreciate and 3. They have an exoskeleton: (aquarium or rock-
 understand: a. The exoskeleton incorporates CaCO3 and protein to provide protection and a firm anchor for muscles, and it pool study)
 incorporates levers for mechanical advantage.
  Evolutionary b. Flexible protein membranes at joints enable movement of the many modified appendages. Observation of as
 trends c. All must moult in order to grow. many live species as
  The definitive 4. While external segmentation is obvious, this aids flexibility but is not internal, so there is no repetition of possible, or arrange
 differences segmental organs. Marine examples have cephalothorax or carapace and segmented abdomen. lesson or course
 between phyla 5. Appendages are modified for sensing (antennae), finding food (pincers or claws), feeding (mouth parts), walking with nearest
  Specific (legs) and swimming, to mention a few. The success of the insects is mainly ascribed to wings. aquarium
 adaptations, 6. Nervous coordination:
 relating to a. Arthropods have cephalisation and a brain leading to a double ventral nerve cord. Use a specific
 structures to b. They have complex eyes and sensory appendages. locally available
 functions 7. Nutrition: example, but
  The richness of a. Mouth parts cut and sort food. ensure ability to
 marine b. A compartmentalised through gut, performing external digestion, deals with the wide range of food recognise major
 biodiversity collected. sub-groups or
 and c. Large digestive gland takes in food particles to further digest them. classes and defining
 Why it must be 8. Circulation – characteristics
 conserved a. Blood system is open, with haemocoels joined by vessels and a dorsal heart. Many YouTube
 b. Internal organs are bathed in blood (which is similar to sea water). Incorporate into Clips are available
 c. Haemoglobin or haemocyanin may be present. ecosystem field to illustrate all the
 9. Gaseous exchange – generally through gills in a chamber of the carapace. trips defined and
 10. Excretion – Green glands in crustaceans, and malpighian tubules and rectal pads in insects. illustrated content
 11. Reproduction: on this topic
 a. Marine arthropods lay eggs, which may have been fertilised internally or externally or could even be
 parthenogenetic.
 b. Eggs hatch as Nauplius larvae, which then go through various developmental stages as meroplankton.
 c. Specific life cycles can vary from this general description.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 69
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Marine Arthropod Groups
 Term 4 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 Time is Diagrams and photos are needed, but only for students to be able to identify each class or group. Investigation of a Charts
 included in The depth of this comparison between
 the topic is at a level Pycnogonids (sea spiders): the different animals Video clips
 Arthropoda 1. Head with pincers and a feeding proboscis.
 where pupils
 intro and 2. Reduced abdomen. Slides
 groups. appreciate and 3. Eight legs and a slender body.
 understand: 4. Digestive and reproductive organs extend into legs. Diagrams to show
 Crustaceans: symmetry
  Evolutionary 1. Include barnacles, isopods and amphipods, shrimps, prawns, lobsters and crabs.
 trends 2. Apart from the barnacle, all have a fairly similar body plan and structure. Obtain and euthanase
  The definitive 3. Barnacle: invasive harbour crabs
 differences a) Exhibits a mollusc-like structure but starts out as a “shrimp”. for dissection
 between phyla b) The shell-like plates are produced as an outgrowth of exoskeleton.
  Specific c) The legs (cirri) are used to filter feed.
 adaptations, 4. Lobsters (isopods, amphipods and shrimps):
 relating to a) Vary in structure and shape as well as appendages, but have very similar internal
 structures to anatomy.
 functions b) Very close to the generic features mentioned in the introduction.
  The richness of 5. Crabs:
 marine a) Also very similar to the generic anatomy.
 biodiversity b) Have a typically broad flat carapace and a small segmented abdomen folded
 and underneath.
 Why it must be 6. The fossil record shows that some crustaceans moved onto land along with proto-arachnids,
 conserved giving rise to myriapods (millipedes and centipedes), arachnids (spiders and scorpions) and
 insects (the most “successful” animals on the planet), amongst other lesser-known groups. Very
 few of these land-living classes have ventured back to sea with any real success.

70 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

31. Human Impacts upon Ocean Biodiversity (HIPPO)
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Oceans
 Investigatio
 Time ns Resources
 An hour Human threats to Biodiversity as defined by the International Union for Conservation of Nature is the variability among living organisms; Visit an Eco- https://www.e-
 HIPPO biodiversity including terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are part. park or SAN education.psu.ed
 Intro The Human Biodiversity includes species, genetic and ecosystem diversity. Parks u/geog30/node/
 And an Impacts topic is facility to 394
 hour for one which There are many threats to biodiversity. The most significant human threats to biodiversity can be remembered by using discover the
 each sub- learners should the acronym HIPPO: Habitat Loss, Invasive Species, Pollution, (Human) Population growth and Overharvesting. elements of
 topic be able to HIPPO
 Total 5 hrs understand and
 Essential to an ocean economy is a sustainable approach to the management of the coastlines, the ocean and all that it
 apply
 contains. To accomplish this sustainability, the biodiversity of all habitats must be protected.
 multidisciplinary
 skills to illustrate
 the integrated
 nature of ecology
 and human
 engagement. It is
 here where
 interspecies
 equity should
 contextualise
 human “light”
 footprints on
 planet earth.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 71
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

HIPPO-Habitat Destruction
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Investigations Resources
 1 hour HIPPO The section on ecosystems section illustrates some marine habitats. Studies have been shown that these ecosystems are .https://w
 For HIPPO Habitat interrelated, sensitive and exceptionally complex. No ecosystem habitat exists in isolation, without inputs and outputs that ww.refere
 and Destruction are connected to other marine habitats and ecosystems. Hence the concept of “One Ocean” – and that all elements are nce.com/s
 Habitat Human threats to interrelated. cience/ha
 Destruction biodiversity bitat-
 The Human The first letter of the HIPPO acronym (see previous section) refers to human destruction of habitats. Habitat destruction has destructio
 Impacts topic is impacted upon biodiversity and is a primary cause endangering the survival of many species. n-
 one which 1. The high level of endemism along the South African coastline makes marine organisms particularly vulnerable, as c2a7d898
 learners should many species are not found anywhere else on the planet. 94498e78
 be able to 2. Protecting habitats is critical for sustaining biodiversity. Many species of invertebrates and vertebrates found in ?qo=cdpA
 understand and the coastal zone are particularly sensitive to human disturbance. rticles#
 apply 3. Migratory species are sensitive to habitat destruction because they occupy more than one habitat and move along
 multidisciplinary a migratory pathway between habitats. All these areas require protection for such species to survive. Should one
 skills to illustrate of the “pathway” habitats be damaged, it could cause adverse effects on the other ecosystems; subsequent
 the integrated habitats in turn affect others, and domino effects could result.
 nature of ecology The following activities destroy marine habitats:
 and human 1. Fishing trawler vessels that catch bottom-dwelling fish have destroyed large areas of sea bed. Bottom trawling is
 engagement. It is by far the most damaging form of fishing. Some trawling paths result in more damage than others (eg trawling
 here where over coral reefs has been compared to chopping down forests with the aim of catching a few squirrels).
 interspecies 2. The prawn fishery is associated with substantial damage to habitats. Prawn farming commonly occurs in estuaries
 equity should in which mangroves are found. Clearing these habitats to farm prawns severely endangers unique and limited
 contextualise mangrove ecosystems, and in turn affects natural fish breeding grounds.
 human “light” 3. Anchors that are not fixed to the sea bed but are allowed to drag along the sea bottom damage marine habitats.
 footprints on Coral reefs in particular are sensitive to anchor damage.
 planet earth. 4. Disruption of the sea floor by trawling or dredging lifts sediment from the sea bed into the water column. This
 increased sediment load blocks light, clogs gills of animals, and blocks the feeding structures of many organisms.
 This impedes their functionality and increases their stress. Some dredged sediments from the sea floor are toxic
 and affect animals in the water column. Increased sediment affects the food supply, shelter and breeding grounds
 of marine organisms.
 5. Human construction upstream of the coastal zone in wetlands or estuaries affects coastal habitats, such as
 estuaries and their associated wetlands, and beaches.
 6. Construction of buildings, harbour walls and marinas is notorious for destroying coastal zone habitats, beach
 areas and wetlands.

72 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

HIPPO-Invasive species
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Investigations Resources
 1 hour HIPPO The second letter of the HIPPO acronym refers to the introduction of invasive alien animals and plants into an area
 Invasive sp by human activity.
 Human threats to 1. Some introduced organisms have not adapted to the local conditions, which means they do not survive
 biodiversity and die off.
 The Human 2. For other species, conditions are perfect to live, grow and reproduce within the new habitat. Being away
 Impacts topic is from their natural and historic range of distribution enables these species to thrive.
 one which 3. In this new habitat the introduced alien organisms do not have the natural controls that balance
 learners should reproduction in their original habitat. This is because their natural predators, parasites or diseases are
 be able to absent in the new habitat.
 understand and 4. Organisms moving into an area can affect resident species in many ways. Introduced species compete for Many
 apply food and prey upon or parasitize local species; they can hybridize with local species or carry in unfamiliar YouTube Clips
 multidisciplinary diseases to which local species have no immunity; and they can disturb local symbiotic interactions to such are available
 skills to illustrate an extent that one or (normally) both symbionts become extinct. to illustrate all
 the integrated 5. Introduced alien species can disrupt local ecosystems to such an extent that they are termed aggressively the defined
 nature of ecology invasive, and may eventually cause the total extinction of entire endemic communities. and illustrated
 and human content on
 engagement. It is Many marine invasive species are transported across the ocean as “hitchhikers” on hulls of vessels or in ship ballast this topic
 here where water. Some have become attached to and been transported by means of scuba gear, packaging, consignments of
 interspecies live animals or bait, exotic food, and as parasites on living host organisms. Some have been introduced by the Refer to
 equity should mariculture industry. These non-indigenous species threaten the abundance and diversity of indigenous species SANPARKS
 contextualise and the stability of their habitats. and DEA
 human “light” material
 footprints on Examples of alien invasive species that are known to have invaded South African waters are the European shore crab
 planet earth. and the Mediterranean mussel.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 73
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

HIPPO-Human Population Increase
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Investigations Resources
 1 hour HIPPO The third letter of the HIPPO acronym refers to human population increase.
 Human 1. During the 20th century, the global human population quadrupled from about 1.5 billion to 6 billion
 Population people.
 increase 2. The world population reached 7.5 billion in 2016, and is currently growing at around 1.13% per year.
 Human threats to 3. Populations already clustered in villages and cities along coasts multiplied even more rapidly than the
 biodiversity general population, partly due to migration from inland. Today, 60% of the world’s population lives
 The Human within 200 km of a coast and this percentage continues to rise.
 Impacts topic is 4. Coastal regions are thus undergoing environmental decline, and the problem is particularly acute in
 one which developing countries.
 learners should 5. The reasons for this environmental decline are numerous and complex.
 be able to 6. The high concentration of people in coastal regions has also produced many economic benefits,
 understand and including improved transportation links, industrial and urban development, revenue from tourism,
 apply and food production.
 multidisciplinary 7. Conversely, the combined effects of booming population growth and economic and technological
 skills to illustrate development are threatening the ecosystems that provide these economic benefits.
 the integrated
 nature of ecology
 and human Many YouTube Clips
 engagement. It is are available to
 here where illustrate all the
 interspecies defined and
 equity should illustrated content on
 contextualise this topic
 human “light”
 footprints on
 planet earth.

74 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

HIPPO-Pollution
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Oceans
 Depth
 Time Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 1 hour The human HIPP The fourth letter of the HIPPO acronym refers to pollution. Pollutants, apart from being unsightly and disturbing in pristine
 impacts topic environments, affect living organisms in the following ways.
 is one which Many
 learners 1. Litter: YouTube
 should be able a. Animals and birds may mistake plastic items for food and ingest them. Larger items can cut or block the digestive Clips are
 to understand tract, causing the death of the animal. Little is known about the effect of micro-plastics, which may result in available to
 and apply increased levels of toxins in the body. Because plastics biodegrade exceptionally slowly, this problematic situation illustrate all
 multidisciplina will continue for thousands of years. the defined
 ry skills to b. Entanglement of animals; polluting items can choke or strangle animals and birds, leading to severe problems and and
 illustrate the death. illustrated
 integrated 2. Oil: content on
 nature of a. Oil floats on the water surface and causes animals to suffocate and their body functions to fail. this topic
 ecology and b. Some birds lose their ability to insulate themselves when covered by oil. Some cannot fly when oiled.
 human 3. Many dissolved materials and substances in suspension drain into the ocean:
 engagement.
 a. These run into the ocean from industrial areas, via water courses (all drains do lead to the ocean).
 It is here
 b. They include microbial contaminants, sewage effluent (treated and untreated), industrial waste, heavy metals,
 where
 fertilisers from agricultural activities, sediments and many other substances.
 interspecies
 4. Agricultural activity:
 equity should
 contextualise a) Increases soil runoff and erosion, thus resulting in increased sediment load and turbidity of the water column.
 human “light” b) Increased sediment loads in the water column clog animal gills and affect the functionality of organisms.
 footprints on 5. Pesticides and toxic chemicals:
 planet earth. a) These substances affect reproductive capacity in some animals, as the toxins build up in fatty tissue.
 b) Many beaches off the coast have been condemned for swimming as the water quality is of a standard that is likely
 to damage the health of the bathing public. The impact on animals in such areas will be dire.
 6. Nitrates and phosphate nutrients:
 a) From agricultural areas and mariculture facilities, fertilizers or animal waste end up in rivers and flow into the
 ocean, where they change the water chemistry and affect animals in the area.
 b) These substances cause eutrophication (algal blooms deplete dissolved oxygen and severely affect ecosystems).
 c) Some scientists have argued that this disruption could be the cause of rock lobster “walk outs” at Elands Bay on
 the West Coast.
 d) There are records of fish which have absorbed dissolved minerals such as mercury.
 4. Thermal pollution:
 a. Heat pollution occurs when warm water (used as a coolant in industry or electricity production) is returned to a
 colder sea.
 b. This changes the immediate coastal habitat, resulting in a change in the local biodiversity.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 75
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 5. Noise pollution:
 a. Sonar from ships (including seismic research surveyor vessels, naval activities and thousands of other vessels on the
 seas) negatively affect marine animals that use echolocation (such as the natural navigation abilities of migratory
 animals). The full impact of sonar pollution is not yet known.

76 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

HIPPO-Over Exploitation
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Investigations Resources
 1 hours HIPPO The fifth letter of the HIPPO acronym refers to over-exploitation.
 Over Exploitation
 Human threats to Ocean produce is the primary source of dietary protein for over 2 billion people on our planet, which means
 biodiversity that 1 in every 7 people on earth relies on seafood to survive. However, 80% of all fish stocks have been Many
 The Human YouTube
 exploited to their biological limits and beyond.
 Impacts topic is Clips are
 one which 1. Mechanised fishing and technology – such as sonar, radar and large-scale fishing methods – have available to
 learners should resulted in the near-fatal reduction of natural populations. illustrate all
 be able to 2. Individual species are becoming threatened or are near-extinct. the defined
 understand and 3. Most large fish species found in the ocean have been exploited, resulting in harvesters and and
 apply fishermen fishing down the food chain as they target smaller species. illustrated
 multidisciplinary 4. An understanding of over-exploitation of marine resources requires insight into the fine balance content on
 skills to illustrate this topic
 between sustainable maintenance and extraction of natural marine resources on the one hand,
 the integrated
 nature of ecology and on the other, the ecosystems in which they are found.
 and human 5. In addition, there is a need to understand sustainable practices when utilising technologically
 engagement. It is advanced equipment to extract resources. In the past century, the volumes of extracted living and
 here where non-living resources has reached unprecedented high levels.
 interspecies 6. Marine scientists need to research and find the balance between extraction operations and the
 equity should impact of those operations on the surrounding habitats and ecosystems.
 contextualise the
 7. Certain resource supplies have been depleted; others will take hundreds of years to recover.
 necessity of a
 “light” human 8. In South Africa, marine resource use includes the extraction of petroleum oil, gas and phosphate
 footprint. as well as harvesting of seafood by trawling and long-line fishing.
 9. Key to the future ocean economy is the protection of resources in our established marine
 protected areas, and the development of our mariculture industry.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 77
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Section 3.2 Grade 11

78 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

32. Marine Careers
 Term 1 Strand – Humans and the Ocean

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 4 hours Careers 2: Marine Sciences leads to a wide range of career fields such as Zoology, Oceanography, Geology, Coastal Processes, Should be introduced www
 Research on Geophysics, Biogeochemistry, Eco-System Dynamics, Ocean Modelling, Forecasting and many more. Students can move in Gr 11 for students marinecareers.net
 careers for into the following specialisations: to timeously make Research the
 marine scientists applications SANCOR website
 a) Biological oceanographer http://www.marine
 Learners should b) Fisheries scientist Students should careers.net/
 understand the c) Marine specialist – journalist or videographer select a Marine
 fields available as d) Teacher or facilitator at a school, aquarium, museum or science centre Sciences career and https://unh.az1.qua
 career e) Vet or part of a collections team at an aquarium prepare an oral ltrics.com/jfe/form/
 opportunities. f) Technical development of equipment for the collection of ocean data presentation SV_cN0PqaWhaV5J
 This topic should g) Physical oceanographer including:
 oEZ
 inform learners in h) Chemical oceanographer and marine geochemist
 terms of the i) Marine and ocean engineer 1. What skills are
 career options j) Marine archaeologist required?
 open to them; k) Marine policy developer 2. What are the
 where they could l) Environmental lawyer responsibilities?
 study further and 3. Who employs such a
 at what level person?
 Marine scientists are employed by universities, government departments and units or companies that consult to the
 they need to 4. What are the daily
 perform at school government. tasks of this job?
 level to be 5. What are the
 eligible for While all roles require good general expertise and scientific abilities, specialisation in one particular area is usually opportunities for
 furthering their required for progression in the profession. Examples of specialties are Coastal Management, Fisheries Biology, self-employment.
 studies in Marine Mathematical Modelling, Ecosystem Dynamics, and Chemical Risk Assessment.
 Sciences.
 Students should be made aware that Marine Sciences is a growing career option in South Africa and new career options
 are likely to develop in the field. In addition, they should be entrepreneurial in their thinking, as this will enable them to
 be self-employed as consultants or to develop a company that does not depend on government salaries, funding or
 grants.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 79
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

33. Scientific Inquiry
 Term 1 Strand – Humans and the Ocean
 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours The This section provides the basis for the students to develop a Marine Sciences project that demonstrates their skills in Observation Hypothesis A range of
 Scientific applying the Marine Sciences curriculum. As scientists-to-be, students need to practise observing, inquiring, investigating, testing Theory and truth equipment can be
 Method and researching the natural world. It is here that Marine Sciences as a curriculum subject comes into its own. The oceans are used for this
 filled with beauty, fascinating elements and intriguing occurrences. The Marine Sciences project is the opportunity for a Problem statement (initial practical work; for
 In this grade teacher to engender passion for the oceans among Marine Sciences students. inquiry) example, transects,
 Teachers The Scientific Method Secchi disks,
 Hypothesis (allows for
 and learners The Scientific Method and water sampling
 predictions)
 need to deal 1. Conducting an investigation – one conducts an investigation by collecting evidence from a variety of sources, equipment
 with developing an explanation based on the data, and communicating and defending one’s conclusions. Experimental design
 variables 2. Method – the scientific method requires questions leading to a hypothesis that can tested by observations, in turn (materials and procedure)
 and apply
 leading to conclusions. Data collection
 the
 Scientific 3. A theory is proposed on the basis of evidence obtained from research conducted. (observations and
 Method in a Science Process Skills measurements)
 way that a 1. Observe – use all the senses.
 Analysis and interpretation
 thorough 2. Question and hypothesise – a hypothesis is a tentative explanation about possible causes or dynamics of a of data or results
 working phenomenon.
 (inferences)
 knowledge 3. Predict – scientific predictions are based on observations, measurements, and relationships between observed
 of the variables. Drawing conclusions
 variables, 4. Use the right terminology – all procedures and reporting are vitally dependent on the precise use of terms. (answering the research
 control and 5. Define variables – identify and distinguish between variables that are controlled (held constant) and those which are question or problem)
 uncontrolled manipulated. Have we proved or
 variables is a. Independent (manipulated) variable – the measurement or condition that is regulated by the person doing the disproved the hypothesis?
 achieved. experiment.
 b. Dependent (responding) variable – what you measure and observe in response to changes in the independent Extension (further inquiry –
 variable. pose new questions that are
 c. Controlled (fixed) variable – these refer to conditions that must be kept the same (held constant) in order to related to the original
 isolate the result; a controlled variable has the potential to vary but is deliberately restricted. question and can lead to
 6. Perform experiment. new investigations)
 7. Record results.
 8. Analyse results.
 9. Draw conclusions.
 10. Produce a research report and poster – the report should include Introduction, Hypothesis, Method, Results,
 Discussion, and Conclusion.
 Research Skills
 5. Classify – group related objects and ideas together.
 6. Quantify – use numbers and measurements related to time, length, width, volume and ratio.

80 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

7. Communicate results – describe verbally (text) or visually in tables and graphs.
8. Interpret, discuss data and draw conclusions – explain an observation.

Please Note that the Scientific Inquiry is a central Purpose (see 2.3) of this curriculum and should influence each of the
topics. Although listed as a topic here it should be referred to on an ongoing basis as informing the approach to the
curriculum.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 81
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

34. Sediments
 Term 1 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours 1. Sediment is material such as sand and stone that is suspended in liquid and normally settles out. Sediments are Refer to the turbidity Many YouTube
 Sediments is classified by origin and the situation where it is discovered. The continent margins and ocean basins are current that severed Clips are available
 an important constantly supplied with sediment materials. the telephone line to illustrate all the
 area of 2. Types of sediment origins include: between London and defined and
 Oceanographic a) Lithogenous sediments from rock New York illustrated content
 study and b) Biogenous sediments from living organisms on this topic
 should be c) Hydrogenous sediments precipitating out of sea water Use Secchi disk to
 learnt with the d) Cosmogenous sediments from outside the earth’s atmosphere. record the turbidity
 view to apply 3. Patterns of sediment situation include: or transparency of
 the content to a) Terrigenous sediments, found near their source on the coastline the water column
 practicals and b) Neritic or coastal sediments, which come from land and the coast, and are found under shallow waters
 project work. towards the edge of the continental shelf Refer to the impact
 c) Pelagic sediments are found at depths. sediments have on
 4. Finer sediments are deposited offshore away from currents and waves, in places such as quiet bays or estuaries. ecosystems in oceans
 Coarse sediments are concentrated close to their source in turbulent waters. (such as temperature
 5. An accumulation of sediment on the continental margin can slide down to the ocean depths, resulting in a change, clogging of
 turbidity current – which consists of saturated sediment and forms a continental rise. animals’ gaseous
 6. Sediment cores are sampled from the ocean floor. These illustrate that sediments form distinct layers which vary exchange organs,
 in colour, thickness and shape as well as type and grain-size of particles. The layers show a great deal about the effects on plants’
 age and origin of the sample and the conditions experienced prior to deposition (eg climate and biological capacity to
 content). photosynthesise)
 7. Sediment particle sizes are described in a classification system. These range from boulders of more than 256 mm
 to silt and clay of less than 0.0039 mm. In decreasing order the classification is boulders, cobbles, pebbles, Create a turbidity
 granules, very coarse sand, coarse sand, medium sand, fine sand, very fine sand, mud, and finally silt and clay. current model with
 8. Geological oceanographers study the sea bottom using piston corers, dredges, grab samplers and acoustic sediment
 profiling.
 9. Many countries mine sand and gravel for the construction industry from the ocean floor. Off Scotland’s coast, coal Obtain a sediment
 is mined from the ocean bed. Off the South African coast, heavy sands are mined along the Richards Bay coast. Off sample and analyse
 the north-west coast of Kleinzee and southern Namibia, diamonds are mined; these diamonds were washed down the grain size
 from Kimberlite cores on the subcontinent as alluvial sediment.
 10. Oil and gas have been discovered beneath the ocean floor from Angola to the Southern Cape.

82 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

35. Harvesting of Marine Resources
 Term 1 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours Harvests from This subject gives background information on ocean resources, where they are found, and what impacts their This is an ideal topic
 the sea extraction has on the ocean. Research should be conducted on extracting resources from the ocean and how best to on which a research
 manage such extraction in a sustainable way. project can be
 This topic lends 1. The ocean is the most used transportation medium on the planet, and is a sought-after recreation medium. submitted by
 itself to higher 2. The ocean contains the earth's most valuable natural resources. Harvesting of living and non-living resources students
 level thinking from the ocean includes:
 and
 a. Living Resources
 applications of
 I. Fish: trawling and line fishing.
 the content
 used in II. Shellfish.
 discussions and III. Seaweeds.
 debates. b. Marine sediment mining
 Students select I. Drilling for fossil fuels such as crude oil and gas; 30% of oil used by humans is pumped from
 should deposits in continental shelves off coastlines. Antarctica is the only continent where oil is not
 understand extracted.
 what content II. Phosphate – to be used as fertiliser.
 learnt in
 III. Table salt.
 sections such
 as marine IV. Sands and gravels.
 geology V. Deep sea minerals including copper, iron, manganese, nickel and cobalt.
 Sedimentology, c. Desalination
 water quality I. Desalination is the removal of salt from sea water to create water suitable for human
 and Marine consumption by applying reverse osmosis though high-pressure membranes.
 Many
 Biology can be II. Challenges in applying desalination include leaching of minerals by pure distilled water, the YouTube Clips
 applied to impact of increasing salinity, and high energy consumption. are available
 discussions.
 3. Seafood is the most commonly harvested ocean resource; approximately 90 billion tons of seafood are to illustrate all
 harvested each year. With a human population of over 7 billion people, 30% of all fish stocks have collapsed, the defined
 and it is likely that all fish stocks will have collapsed by 2050 unless preventative measures are taken. and illustrated
 4. Undesirable outcomes associated with excessive fishing are – content on
 a. Inefficient use of the catch (eg shark finning where sharks are caught, the fins cut off and the rest of the this topic
 body thrown wastefully back into the sea)
 b. By-catch (untargeted waste fish)
 c. Habitat destruction (bottom trawling).
 5. Each country with a coastline has legal jurisdiction over an area stretching 200 km from the coastline into the
 sea, called the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 83
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 6. The Tragedy of the Commons occurs when humans exploit a shared resource in such a way that the demand
 exceeds supply, and the resource becomes unavailable to some people or even for all. In the oceans it is in the
 areas beyond the EEZ, for which there is no legislation – referred to as the “High Seas”, where unsustainable
 exploitation regularly occurs.
 7. Over time, exploitation of fish stocks has increased. Images of the total catch by fishers in the past illustrate that
 fish were much larger, more plentiful and more diverse than at present. In 1988 the exploitation of fisheries
 peaked. Since then, fish caught are smaller and fisheries are currently catching species down the food chain.
 8. All the ocean’s resources are finite.
 a. However, if certain populations of living resources are harvested in a way that allows for natural breeding
 to occur (sustainable use), the abundance of the resource can be replenished.
 b. Typically, present harvesting of seafood is unsustainable.
 c. Without stringent measures to control the harvesting of natural resources, those resources will collapse.
 9. Very little is known about the full consequences of the impacts associated with industrialised large-scale fishing,
 such as bottom trawling, which has severely impacted upon sea floor habitats.
 10. Realistic alternatives to the above impacts exist and are practised by fishers committed to sustainable
 harvesting. These methods include declaring “no-take” zones (Marine Protected Areas, MPAs), sustainable
 seafood initiatives, (SASSI) and the farming of seafood (aquaculture).
 11. Fishery scientists and policy makers are contributing by scientifically evaluating resources, their habitats, and
 how resources can be harvested without compromising their future availability.
 12. Discussions should be encouraged about harvesting resources. Topics include: habitat damage, bycatch (impact
 on “non-targeted resources”), subsistence and commercial quotas, and resource research.

84 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

36. Important Metabolic Processes
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 8 hours Photosynthesis Photosynthesis Investigate photosynthesis by
 Describe the process of photosynthesis using words and symbols: showing that Textbooks
 1. Intake of raw materials. - starch is produced during
 The Depth of
 photosynthesis Living plants
 this topic is at 2. Trapping and storing of energy.
 - light is necessary for
 a level where 3. Formation of food or other important organic compounds and their storage. photosynthesis Suitable
 4 theory 4. Release of oxygen. equipment
 learners
 Mention light and dark phases in relation to chloroplast. No biochemical details of light and dark phases are required. The following investigations can
 plus understand Importance of photosynthesis: be done by learners as Chemicals
 that the flow 1. Produces oxygen in the ocean. experiments, or as
 4 hours of energy from 2. Enables the cellular uptake of carbon dioxide and other nutrients. demonstrations:
 practical 3. Produces food and other important organic compounds. - carbon dioxide is necessary for
 the sun to the
 photosynthesis
 cell to 4. Effects of certain variables on the rate of photosynthesis:
 - chlorophyll is necessary for
 a. Light- Different wavelengths of light penetrate to greater depths, which will dictate the kinds of algae that
 maintain life. photosynthesis
 can grow there. The presence of photosynthetic organisms in the water column will dictate the amount of - oxygen is produced during
 consumers that can live there. photosynthesis
 b. The amount of dissolved carbon dioxide will dictate the potential rate of photosynthesis in the photic OR
 zone. - data can be provided and
 c. Temperature. There is an optimal temperature for photosynthesis to occur. Higher or lower temperatures interpreted by learners
 will slow or even prevent photosynthesis. Textbooks
 Design an investigation or
 The relationship between photosynthesis and respiration (diagram).
 demonstration to show Snails or
 Define compensation depth: that:
 1. The depth at which the oxygen and carbohydrate consumption of a producer at night equals the oxygen and seedlings
 - oxygen is used by living
 carbohydrate produced by day. organisms during respiration Chemicals
 2. At this depth, approximately 1% of surface light is available. - carbon dioxide is produced by Appropriate
 3. This represents the bottom of the euphotic zone and the depth will depend on the clarity of the water. living organisms during equipment
 (diagram to show/define: Photic, Euphotic, Disphotic and Aphotic zones) respiration
 Respiration OR
 Respiration - provide relevant data that can
 Discuss the process of respiration using words and symbols.
 be interpreted by
 1. Aerobic respiration in cytoplasm and mitochondria- brief description of each phase and products: Glycolysis, Learners (identify variables,
 Krebs Cycle, Oxidative phosphorylation. suggest controls, and record
 2. Anaerobic respiration – production of lactic acid in animals, under certain conditions. observations)
 3. Importance of respiration ATP – energy carrier for metabolism.
 No biochemical detail of process required; each phase is mentioned with the resultant products to highlight the complex
 nature of the process and importance of mitochondria. Internet research on
 Chemosynthesis extremophiles and
 Chemosynthesis 1. This process was thought to be insignificant until the early 1990s. chemosynthesis

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 85
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 2. Research has shown it to be quite significant at submarine hydrothermal vents, in marine sediments and even
 in the sea floor crust. Chemosynthesis is performed by bacteria and extremophiles (archaea capable of living in
 extreme conditions, including very high temperatures, pressures and corrosive environments).
 3. The process can be described in words: A typical example of chemosynthesis involves the conversion of
 carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulphide and oxygen into carbohydrates and sulphates. Energy is gained from
 oxidation of the hydrogen sulphide.
 4. The process can also be described with symbols: CO2 + H2S+ O2 (CH2O)x+ SO4

86 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

37. Nucleic Acids – DNA and RNA
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 5 hours Nucleic Acids – A basic understanding of nucleic acids and their operation and significance is required to understand processes such as Build DNA DNA model
 DNA and RNA cell division, growth and differentiation, sexual reproduction, genetics, and DNA or mitochondrial DNA testing and model kit
 fingerprinting. The protein synthesis process should not be examined in detail; students need to be made aware of nucleic
 The Depth of this acids and their structures and their vital importance in life processes. Video clips of Videos
 topic is at a level 1. Structure of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) – deoxyribose sugar, nitrogen bases (adenine, thymine, guanine and DNA
 where learners cytosine) and phosphate group to form nucleotides. fingerprinting
 understand 2. Nucleotides are arranged into strands, linked to form a double strand by hydrogen bonds (nucleotides join A to
 foundational T, and G to C) and are twisted to form a double helix.
 knowledge in 3. DNA replication mechanism is governed by enzymes.
 order to be able 4. DNA fingerprinting is used to establish the relatedness of species. The basic process is extraction; PCR; gel
 to understand electrophoresis; fingerprint. Illustrate with example (eg relatedness of coral colonies in KZN to colonies in
 Genetics. Mozambique).
 5. Structure of RNA (ribonucleic acid) – ribose sugar, nitrogen bases (adenine, uracil, guanine and cytosine).
 6. Form a single strand and may be folded, depending on function and where it is found.
 7. Functions of mRNA, tRNA and rRNA.
 8. The importance of proteins: structural, enzymes, some hormones, cell recognition, active transport.
 9. Explanation of protein synthesis: DNA provides a template which is transcribed to an mRNA strand. This leaves
 the nucleus to be processed at ribosomes. Specific amino acids are transported by tRNA strands, ensuring the
 mRNA strand is translated into a specific sequence of amino acids, giving rise to a particular protein. The
 process is governed by enzymes.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 87
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

38. Cell Division
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 5 hours The Depth of this Students do not need to be able to draw or recognise individual stages. The important concepts to understand are the Prepare a Textbook and
 topic is at a level general processes in each cell division type, the difference between mitosis and meiosis mechanisms, and the reasons for simulation model micrographs
 where learners these cell division processes. using play dough,
 understand the 1. Discuss and define: chromatin, replication, chromosomes, gene, diploid (2n), haploid (n). paper strips, string YouTube clips
 basic 2. A chromosome or chromatid is a histone protein chain with a strand of DNA wrapped around it. or wire enabling
 requirements for 3. Different organisms have different chromosome numbers. modelling of
 growth and Mitosis: “chromosomes” to
 sexual 1. Cell undergoes a series of changes which replicate the chromatin material or DNA strands, and condense them show replication,
 reproduction. to form chromosomes. division, bivalent
 2. These are then arranged so that the replicated strands can be separated and divided into two new cells. formation, random
 3. Mitosis enables growth, repair and asexual reproduction. assortment and
 Meiosis: this process occurs in special sex organs or structures. formation of
 1. Cells undergo two division phases after replication of the chromatin strands. daughter cells and
 2. The first is a reduction division, the second a mitotic one. gametes
 3. Point out that the process has stages in which genetic recombination or diversity is ensured.
 4. The end result is four cells with half the chromosomes or genetic information of the original. (One diploid cell Learners work with
 replicated and then divided to give rise to four haploid cells.) kits at their desks to
 5. The haploid cells are normally gametes. Male and female gametes fuse to form a zygote, which grows into an understand
 embryo and then a new individual. (This process is a bit more complicated in organisms that undergo an chromosome
 alternation of generations – these details can be highlighted when the relevant organism is discussed.) replication and
 6. Meiosis is crucial for sexual reproduction, enabling recombination of genetic material within the gametes and division
 significant variation possibilities through the fusion of gametes from different individuals.
 7. There are several stages at which mutations can arise. (Discuss.)

88 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

39. The Ocean Planet – The Chemistry of Sea Water
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 6 hours Basic Marine Basic Marine Sciences Chemistry Many YouTube
 Sciences 1. Define: matter, atom, molecule, ions, elements, compounds and mixtures. Clips are
 Chemistry Polar Bonding and Covalent Bonds in Water available to
 1. Chemical bonds hold water molecules together: one oxygen and two hydrogen molecules. illustrate all
 Revise Polar 2. The electrons in the molecule are shared by the atoms. the defined
 Bonding; 3. In a covalent bond the electrons spend more time, on average, closer to the oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen and illustrated
 Covalent nucleus. This is a result of the geometry of the water molecule, with H atoms having a higher electronegativity content on this
 Bonds; a focus difference in relation to O atoms. topic
 on Hydrogen 4. This pattern of unequal association results in a charge separation in the water molecule. The section closer to O
 Bonding has a partially negative charge and that closer to H has a partially positive charge. Hence water has polar
 covalent bonds.
 Hydrogen Bonding
 1. A hydrogen bond is formed when a charged part of a molecule having polar covalent bonds forms an
 electrostatic interaction with a substance of opposite charge. Molecules that have nonpolar covalent bonds do
 not form hydrogen bonds.
 2. They are considered weak bonds as they are easily formed and broken under normal conditions.
 3. These bonds are extremely important in biological systems. They stabilise and determine the structure of large
 macro-molecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. They are involved in the mechanism of enzyme catalysis.
 4. Hydrogen bonding between water molecules results in various physical properties – for example, ice floating.
 5. The property of ice floating on water is crucial in cold aquatic ecosystems, because floating ice partly insolates
 the underlying water, enabling aquatic organisms to survive the cold season. (This would not be possible were a
 pond to freeze from the bottom up.)

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 89
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

40. Energy Transmission through Water- Sound
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours Energy Transmission of Sound Energy Through Water How do various birds Excerpts from
 transfer 1. Sound travels through particles bumping against each other as they vibrate. The medium passes on the adapt to refraction and videos
 An energy, movement or pressure-wave away from the source. pressure when diving
 introductory 2. Sound does not travel through a vacuum, as in a vacuum there are no particles to bump against each other. from air into water?
 level of 3. In water the particles are much closer together than in air. Sound waves therefore travel further – and four
 understanding times faster – through water compared with air.
 is required. 4. More energy is required to start a sound wave in water than is required to start a sound wave in air, because
 Learners water is denser.
 should 5. The speed of sound is influenced by temperature, pressure and the salinity of water. The warmer or more
 understand saline the water, the faster the speed of sound travelling through it.
 how to 6. Echo sounders (SONAR) use sound to measure the depth and shape of the ocean floor, and to locate objects
 reference to on the sea floor. Density, currents and suspended particles affect SONAR and can create false readings.
 Sound energy Researchers need to take this tendency into account when interpreting SONAR data.
 traveling in
 water in a
 discussion for
 example on a
 topic
 concerned
 with the
 impact that
 sound has on
 whale
 communities.

90 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

41. pH
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours pH scale 1. The pH scale indicates acidity and alkalinity by measuring the concentration of Using a hand-held pH Handheld pH
 hydrogen ions in a solution. meter, test the pH of meter
 Learners should 2. A pH of 7 is neutral. There is an increase of acidity from pH of 6 to 1, and there is an commonly found liquids
 understand the Vinegar
 increase of alkalinity from pH of 8 to 14.
 detail relating to
 pH and its 3. When CO2 combines with sea water it forms carbonic acid (H2CO3). Lemon Juice
 application in 4. The carbonic acid dissociates to form bicarbonate (HCO3-) and hydrogen ions (H+).
 discussions The bicarbonate ion can further dissociate into a carbonate ion (CO32-) and another Coke
 about water hydrogen ion.
 quality and 5. These molecules and ions exist in equilibrium. Black coffee
 Ocean
 Acidification. 6. The ⇄ arrows mean the reaction proceeds to the right or to the left to reach Sea water
 equilibrium, thus both producing and taking up hydrogen ions.
 7. This is illustrated in the equation below: All-purpose
 cleaner (eg
 CO2 +H2O ⇄ H2CO3 ⇄ HCO3- + H+ ⇄ CO32- + 2H+
 Handy Andy)
 8. The above equation describes a series of reactions that allows CO2 to act as a buffer.
 9. This means that CO2 prevents sudden changes in acidity or alkalinity of a solution. Milk
 10. The buffering capacity of CO2 is important for organisms, most of which require a
 steady pH and chemistry of sea water for their life processes – which depend in part
 on pH.
 11. The pH range of sea water is 7.5 to 8.5, with an average of 7.8.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 91
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

42. Currents
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
2 hours Currents 1. Wind blowing over a water body sets the surface layer in motion. CO2 Many YouTube
 Learners 2. The surface layer is pushed or dragged by the prevailing wind. Clips are
 should 3. Wind blowing over the open ocean drives large-scale surface currents in a (nearly) constant pattern. Global available to
 understand 4. Relative to someone who stands looking at the ground, the earth rotates in an anticlockwise direction in warming illustrate all the
 the the southern hemisphere, and in a clockwise direction in the northern hemisphere. defined and
 processes 5. Coriolis Effect: the deflecting force that acts on a body in motion owing to the rotation of the earth. illustrated
 involved in 6. Moving water is deflected by the Coriolis Effect. In a similar way, the Coriolis Effect influences moving air. content on this
 current (Explain using diagrams or models.) topic
 development 7. Deflection caused by the Coriolis Effect occurs in a leftward direction in the southern hemisphere, and to
 and the right in the northern hemisphere.
 patterns. 8. Large surface current gyres are formed in the ocean basins – anticlockwise in the southern hemisphere Refer to NOAA
 They should and clockwise in the northern hemisphere. resources which
 understand 9. Water moves more slowly than air. The deflection experienced by water is far greater than the deflection are freely
 how currents experienced by air. available for
 are 10. When deflection of water is compared with that of air, a difference of up to 45° is noted in the deflection teaching
 intricately of these two mediums. purposes and
 involved in 11. Currents have been named the “rivers of the sea”. covers more
 Ocean 12. Changes to a current’s strength and location differ in response to the variations in seasonal wind as well than is required
 habitats and as the latitude in which the current is found. in this topic. Eg
 trends Perpetual
 found. Patterns of Wind-Driven Currents Ocean
 1. The South Atlantic
 a) In the South Atlantic, westerlies continue in the Southern Ocean in what is called the West Wind
 Drift.
 b) South-East Trade Winds move water in a westerly direction.
 c) The Bulge of Brazil splits the South Equatorial Current.
 d) Most of the water in the Equatorial Current is deflected over the equator, northwards towards the
 Caribbean (Florida) where this water joins the Gulf Stream.
 e) The other portion of the current, the South Atlantic Equatorial Current, moves south of the Brazilian
 bulge on the West Atlantic, forming the southward-moving Brazil Current.
 f) The Benguela Current moves north in the East Atlantic, completing the South Atlantic Gyre.
 2. North Atlantic
 a. In the North Atlantic, westerlies move water eastwards in a current called the North Atlantic Drift.
 b. The NE Trades push the water to the west, forming the North Equatorial Current.
 c. The northward-moving water in the west of the North Atlantic forms the Gulf Stream.
 d. The Gulf Stream is fed by the North Equatorial Current, the South Equatorial Current and the Florida
 Current.

92 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 e. On the western side of the North Atlantic is the southward-moving Canary Current. This completes
 the clockwise-moving North Atlantic Gyre.
3. Indian Ocean Currents
 a. The Indian Ocean is predominantly a southern hemisphere ocean.
 b. South-East trade winds push water to the west, creating the South Equatorial Current which splits in
 the region of Madagascar. Firstly the Westerly trade winds push water back towards Australia where
 it joins the West Australia current completing the South Indian Gyre. Secondly the west part of the
 split forms the Agulhas current which travels southwards from there along the African coast.
 c. The summer (June) monsoon winds move water eastward.
 d. Winter winds blow in a westerly direction.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 93
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

43. Genetics
 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 5 hours Genetics Genetics is the scientific study of how genes are passed down from parents to offspring. Most of the original Find a worksheet on Relevant
 work in this very significant field was done by Gregor Mendel in the 1860s. genetically governed YouTube videos
 The Depth of this 1. In conventional Mendelian inheritance, each characteristic has a pair of genes in a diploid individual. external features in
 topic is at a level Only one gene can be expressed, and this expression follows a set pattern. Cichlid Fish and humans.
 where learners 2. Genetic predictions use an understanding of meiosis and the above definitions. Do a statistical study
 understand the Simple monohybrid crosses can be shown, using marine examples, but the ability to do worked using the class, grade or
 basic concepts of examples is not required. school. Present the
 genetics at a 3. Define: allele, dominant, recessive, phenotype, genotype, homozygous, heterozygous, monohybrid results in graph form.
 simple cross, dihybrid cross, independent assortment, polygenetic characteristics, incomplete dominance,
 introductory codominance, continuous and discontinuous variations.
 level. 4. Discuss: genetic engineering (modification). Discuss the concepts, not the details.

 Stress that not all genetic mechanisms are fully understood and this is an ongoing field of research and
 discovery.

94 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

44. Viruses and Bacteria
 Grade 11 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 2 hours Viruses Slides
 The depth of this 1. Technically, viruses are not living organisms. Their significance in the ocean has only been established
 topic is at a level recently with the ability to micro-filter sea water samples using unglazed porcelain filters. Photographs
 2. They are extremely small, ranging from 0.02 to 0.2 micrometres.
 where pupils
 3. They have been found to inhabit sea water that houses cyanobacteria and phytoplankton in Diagrams
 appreciate and concentrations of 10 million to 100 million per ml of sea water. Show micrographs
 understand: 4. Viruses are classified as particles rather than organisms, as they are obligate parasites or holoparasites, Charts
 which exhibit metabolic activity and reproduction only when infecting a specific host.
 1. Evolutionary 5. Structure of a bacteriophage – Provide a diagram Video clips
 trends 6. Reproductive cycle of bacteriophage.
 2. The definitive 7. Viruses are responsible for destroying large amounts of bacteria as part of the microbial nutrient loop;
 differences they also destroy phytoplankton, causing them to be lost from food chains.
 between phyla
 3. Specific Bacteria
 adaptations, Grow bacteria on Agar mix
 Discuss basic structure and some significant examples (diagram to show definitive features).
 relating to agar plates and Petri dishes
 structures to 1. Bacteria are prokaryotic.
 investigate under a Microscope
 functions 2. Important decomposers, vital in all nutrient cycles found everywhere in the oceans.
 strong microscope,
 4. The richness of 3. Anaerobic bacteria can function in absence of oxygen.
 using gram + and –
 marine 4. Extremophiles can live at great temperature and pressure, even deep in ocean floor sediments.
 stains
 biodiversity 5. Chemosynthetic bacteria around hydrothermal vents drive unique deep water food webs.
 and
 5. Why it must be
 conserved

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 95
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

45. Cyanobacteria and Phytoplankton (Microalgae)
 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 3 hours Cyanobacteria
 The depth of this 1. These organisms are referred to as picoplankton; they are 0.2 to 2 micrometres in size.
 topic is at a level 2. They were discovered only recently.
 3. They are responsible for huge levels of photosynthesis, but are not available to conventional food chains
 where pupils
 as they are too small to be collected by consumers.
 appreciate and 4. They enter the microbial nutrient loop. (Explain and draw the microbial loop.)
 understand: Diatoms – Members of Chromista
 1. These are single cells with clear silica (glass) walls called a frustule.
 1. Evolutionary 2. The frustule consists of two closely fitting halves or valves. (Diagram and photos to show structures). Photo identification Phytoplankton
 trends 3. Perforations in the frustule enable transport of substances into and out of the cell. exercise (or with a ID charts.
 2. The 4. Perforation patterns are specific to each species. microscope if
 definitive 5. Chlorophyll and accessory pigments colour diatoms yellow-green. suitable samples Light
 differences 6. Food is stored as fatty acids and oils, which help buoyancy. can be obtained) microscopes
 between 7. Diatoms undergo binary fission (mitotic divisions) to form chains, with new individuals emerging smaller or USB
 phyla and smaller until silica walls weigh them down and they sink. Include drawing microscope
 3. Specific 8. A sexual reproductive process gives rise to new large auxospore, which can stay dormant until conditions exercise in the device
 adaptations, are favourable, then forms frustule and starts the asexual cycle. practical
 relating to 9. Dead cells litter the ocean floor to form thick layers of silica-rich mud.
 structures to Coccolithophores – Calcium-forming Chromista.
 functions 1. They are single-celled with shields of calcium carbonate on the cell walls. (Photos and diagrams to show
 4. The richness structure and functions.)
 of marine 2. Found in bright light near surface; shields may act to reduce incoming light.
 biodiversity 3. Dead cells are deposited in thick layers on the sea bed, forming chalk and limestone.
 and Dinoflagellates – Members of the Protista
 5. Why it must 1. They are single-celled, with two flagellae enabling them to rotate and move up and down in water column.
 be conserved (Diagrams and photos to inform a discussion of structure and function.)
 2. Some inhabit ectoderm of coral polyps as mutualistic symbiotic partners (Zooxanthellae). They
 photosynthesise, using nutrients from the polyps, providing food for both.
 3. Can reproduce rapidly in good high-nutrient environments, to form harmful algal blooms (HABs), which
 are visible as “red tides”. Some form toxins that are harmful to consumers or humans who harvest affected
 filter feeders.
 4. The HAB types are also bioluminescent (define), glowing blue or green when they are subjected to force
 (for example, a propeller or paddle striking the water or breaking waves).
 Emphasise the significance of Phytoplankton, ecologically, as a massive biomass of primary producers, feeding most
 oceanic food webs and producing between 50% and 80% of the world’s oxygen.

96 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

46. Seaweeds (Macroalgae) – Introduction Green and Red
 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 7 hours Seaweeds (Macroalgae) “Seaweed” is a common name for macroalgae. The term “sea plant” is used in some texts because authors view “weeds”
 as alien and problematic. Strictly speaking, “plants” refers to members of the Kingdom Plantae, but not all macroalgae Visit to rocky shore
 belong to this group. The classification of macroalgae is in a state of flux, but prevailing research classifies them under or aquarium to see
 Chromista and Plantae. Until recently, they were all classed as Protista. other sea plants in
 The depth of this topic situ
 is at a level where pupils Macroalgae can be classified in three groups, based on the photosynthetic and accessory pigments they contain: green,
 appreciate and brown and red. These are often seen in the colour of the seaweed, but may be masked. Accessory pigments enable Plants and
 different wavelengths of light to be absorbed and passed to chlorophyll, which normally utilises red and violet light. structures selected
 understand:
 1. Macroalgae grow on solid structures, mainly rocks, in the euphotic zones of the ocean and in rocky intertidal for discussion
 zones. (Revise the spectral colours and how they are filtered out as water depth increases, and the implication for should be Pestle and
 1. Evolutionary trends plants. Define benthic and epiphytic.) recognisable from mortar
 2. The definitive
 2. They need to attach themselves to the substrate, and possess a structure that allows a broad surface area for diagrams and
 differences photosynthesis and also helps the algae to cope with abiotic stresses in their specific habitat. These stresses photographs. Suitable
 between phyla
 include wave action, predation, desiccation, competition and sand inundation. Ideally they should solvent
 3. Specific 3. As they are normally covered by water, they can absorb nutrients, water and carbon dioxide through all their be highlighted for
 adaptations, surfaces. This renders specialised roots and complex vascular or conducting tissue unnecessary. study during field Filter paper
 relating to 4. Shapes include filaments, cylinders, branched or feathery structures, thin sheets and encrustations. Depending on trip
 structures to their specific habitat, they are flexible, streamlined, abrasion resistant and strong. Beakers
 functions 5. Algae are very efficient producers, but are limited in size and abundance (but not necessarily diversity) in
 4. The richness of environments where temperature is high and/ or nutrient levels are low. Consequently, they are abundant on Paper Fresh
 marine biodiversity
 cold-current shorelines, where upwelling provides ample nutrients, but are greatly reduced in tropical regions chromatography of samples of
 and where the temperature is high and nutrient levels are low. crushed samples: a algae
 5. Why it must be
 6. Algae have complex reproductive cycles, often involving an alternation of generations. (Illustrate this with a comparison to
 conserved diagram to show typical alternation). The (2n) sporophyte produces (n) spores through meiosis, germinating to (n) observe different
 male and female gametophytes, producing (n) gametes which fuse to form (2n) zygote, which grows to become a pigments in the
 sporophyte. three groups
 7. Although we are far more familiar with these relatively visible marine algae, and they are significant producers
 along certain coastlines, the group accounts for only about 5% of ocean productivity, with the rest being
 attributed to (less visible) phytoplankton.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 97
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Green Algae
 Term 2 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 2 hours Green Algae The green and red algae are both regarded as Plantae. Although they can form large multicellular structures, these Live samples of the photos and
 are thallus structures exhibiting very little or no cell differentiation. prescribed diagrams
 Green Algae fall within the Division Chlorophyta: examples should be
 The depth of this 1. Green Algae are the most diverse group of algae. obtained for
 topic is at a level 2. They exhibit a range of algal forms. (Photos and diagrams.) examination
 where pupils 3. They have chlorophyll a and b and the same accessory pigments as the terrestrial green plants, such as
 appreciate and beta carotene (yellow) and some xanthophylls (yellow/brown).
 4. Consequently, they use the same part of the light spectrum for photosynthesis as terrestrial plants, and
 understand:
 are found close to the surface of water or in intertidal zones.
 5. Their cell walls are made up of cellulose.
 1. Evolutionary
 6. They store food as starch, fats and oils.
 trends
 7. Chloroplasts are enclosed by a double membrane.
 2. The
 8. Most reproduce with a typical alternation of generations, with the sporophyte and gametophyte appearing
 definitive Visit to rocky shore
 similar (isomorphic), and the gametes looking the same as each other (isogametes).
 differences or aquarium to see
 Example: Sea Lettuce (Ulva sp.) (Show photos and diagrams). Note: If the prescribed examples of seaweeds are not
 between other sea plants in
 available, a suitable local example should be selected and discussed in similar detail. Sea lettuce
 phyla situ
 3. Specific 1. Sea lettuce forms flat sheets, generally two cells thick. samples
 adaptations, 2. It is found all along the South African coastline in calm gullies and high shore rock pools, where wave
 relating to action is minimal.
 structures to 3. It can survive a range of temperatures, salinities and chemical concentrations.
 functions 4. All of its cells can photosynthesise and divide, so growth is rapid, making it an excellent pioneer in recently
 4. The richness cleared areas (sand inundation, storm scouring etc.) (Define and discuss Succession.)
 of marine 5. The exposed upper sheets can dry out to resemble dark cellophane.
 biodiversity
 and
 5. Why it must
 be conserved

98 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Red Algae
 Term 2 Red Algae Strand – Marine Biology

Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

2 hours Red Algae Red Algae fall within the Division Rhodophyta: Live samples of the
 1. They have high species diversity, accounting for almost two thirds of all algae. prescribed
 2. They exhibit all the typical algal forms, many being thick and rubbery and some being partly or highly examples should be
 calcified. These structures are all adaptations to specific habitats. (Provide photos and diagrams.) obtained for Fresh Purple Laver
 examination
 3. They possess chlorophyll-a and red pigments including phycoerythrin, which absorbs blue light. Blue light
 The depth of this
 penetrates deeper through water than any other colour of the light spectrum. The phycoerythrin traps
 topic is at a level
 energy for the chlorophyll-a in the chloroplasts to be able to function normally.
 where pupils
 4. They can grow at depths of 40 cm to 250m, depending on water clarity, but are also well represented in
 appreciate and
 shallow water and into the intertidal zone.
 understand:
 5. Their cell walls contain cellulose, agars and carrageenans (all complex polysaccharides).
 6. They store food as a complex starch, floridian starch, similar to animal glycogen.
 1. Evolutionary
 trends 7. Chloroplasts are bound by a double membrane.
 Visit to rocky shore
 2. The 8. Many species are epiphytes on other plants, normally kelp.
 or aquarium to see
 definitive 9. While some red algae reproduce by means of an alternation-of-generations cycle, many exhibit a third
 other sea plants in
 differences generation between the gametophyte and sporophyte generations. This is known as a carposporophyte situ
 between generation. (Details are beyond the scope of this curriculum*.)
 phyla
 Example (West and South Coast): Purple Laver (Porphyra capensis) (Provide photos and diagrams.)
 3. Specific
 adaptations, 1. Purple laver grows high up in the intertidal zone, close to the spring high-tide level, and is found along
 relating to most of the South African coastline except for the far North East.
 structures to 2. The sporophyte is microscopic and it is the gametophytes that are prominent.
 functions 3. These grow as clumps of overlapping thin, folded sheets or fronds, up to 15 cm in length.
 4. The richness 4. The male fronds have a yellowish fringe whereas the female fronds have a pink fringe.
 of marine 5. The exposed upper sheets can dry out and then resemble dark cellophane.
 biodiversity
 6. Extreme desiccation is possible by losing fluid from a gel-like material in between the cells, rather than
 and
 5. Why it must from cells themselves. The dry top layer insulates those below.
 be conserved 7. Purple laver can grow in lower intertidal zones as well, but tends to be removed by aggressive grazing.
 Example (East Coast): Stalked Roseweed (Rhodymenia natalensis) (Provide photos and diagrams.)
 1. Stalked roseweed is found mainly on lower shore rocks and into the infratidal zone. It is found all along the
 coastline but is particularly common on the KZN coast.
 2. This bright red seaweed spreads across rocks as a branched rhizome-like stolon, a bit like spreading grass,
 from which “hairy” stalks grow. These flatten out into dichotomously forked fronds at the ends.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 99
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 *Note for text writers: The sporophyte (2n) produces spores (n), giving rise to isomorphic (n) male and female
 gametophytes. The male gametophyte releases sperms which are chemically attracted to eggs in cysts on the
 fronds of female gametophyte. After fertilisation, the zygote grows to form a microscopic multicellular (2n)
 carposporophyte in the cyst. All the carposporophytes produce (2n) carpospores by mitosis and these are
 released to sink to the surrounding rock, where they grow into (2n) sporophytes. This third generation
 capitalises on the less successful sexual phase by giving rise to far more potential sporophytes through mitosis.

100 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

47. Brown Algae-Chromista
 Term 3 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 2 hours The significant brown algae fall under the Kingdom Chromista, Division Ochrophyta, Class Phaeophyceae. Live samples of the
 1. They form multicellular thallus structures, but the larger varieties may undergo some cell differentiation prescribed
 to form tissues. examples should be
 The depth of this 2. They exhibit all typical algal forms, but some species (kelps) grow very big (up to 70 m long) and exhibit a obtained for
 topic is at a level level of specialisation with differentiated body parts – holdfast, stipe, fronds and pneumatocysts examination
 where pupils (bladders). (Provide photos and diagrams.)
 3. They also possess the photosynthetic pigments chlorophyll-a and -c, as well as, typically, fucoxanthin,
 appreciate and
 giving the algae a brown colour. This enables them to utilise colours from the middle of the light spectrum
 understand: and to grow at greater depths.
 4. They can grow at depths of 40 m to 250 m, depending on water clarity, but are also well represented in
 1. Evolutionary shallow water and into the lower intertidal zone, where wave action can be significant.
 trends 5. Their cell walls contain cellulose and alginic acid (alginate), an insoluble gelatinous polysaccharide.
 2. The 6. They store food as a complex polysaccharide called laminarin.
 definitive 7. Chloroplasts are bound by a quadruple membrane, the outer two being associated with the endoplasmic
 differences reticulum. This strongly suggests an endosymbiotic origin.
 between 8. Simple brown algae reproduce by a typical alternation of generations, while others (eg sea bamboo) have
 phyla a large sporophyte (the visible kelp), but microscopic (reduced) gametophytes that live only long enough
 3. Specific to release gametes, which fuse to give rise to new sporophytes. Other more advanced forms have a much
 adaptations, reduced gametophyte on the sporophyte, or no visible gametophyte at all, appearing to produce gametes
 relating to in the same way land plants do.
 structures to Example (West and South Coast): Sea bamboo (Ecklonia maxima) (Provide photos and diagrams.)
 functions 1. Sea bamboo is the largest kelp variety found on the South African coastline and the primary component of
 4. The richness the West Coast Kelp Forest ecosystem. Distribution is limited to the western coastline of SA from Namibia
 of marine to Cape Agulhas. Fresh Sea
 biodiversity Visit to rocky shore Bamboo
 2. It grows in shallow water below the low tide mark, down to a depth of about 15 m.
 and or aquarium to see
 3. It anchors firmly to reefs with holdfasts, and grows hollow stipes until the surface is reached, after which
 5. Why it must other sea plants in
 the top expands to form a gas-filled bladder.
 be conserved situ
 4. A short flat stalk forms at the top of the bladder, from which flat strap-shaped fronds grow. These can
 grow up to 13 mm per day in ideal conditions.
 Example (South and East Coast): Long-leafed Sargassum (Anthofycus longifolius)
 1. This noticeably brown seaweed is abundant in deeper gullies and on rocks below the low tide mark, all
 along the South and East Coast.
 2. It has a hard, twisted, stem-like base, which flattens further along to give rise to blade-like fronds.
 3. The fronds have serrated margins with spur-like outgrowths.
 4. Alternating with the fronds are bladders (for floatation) with leafy clusters at their ends.
 5. They have special reproductive branches, resembling small clusters of berries.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 101
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

48. Vascular plants
 Term 3 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours Relatively few Tracheophyta plants (vascular or true land plants) grow in marine settings. Some can be
 The depth of this found in shallow calm sea beds, but most are limited to estuaries. They are all representatives of the
 topic is at a level Division Magnoliophyta (previously Angiospermae) or flowering plants. Mentioned plants and
 structures should be
 where pupils Sea or eel grasses:
 recognisable from
 appreciate and 1. Most marine magnoliophytes resemble grasses, with underground stems or rhizomes producing
 diagrams and Videos
 understand: upright branches with long flat leaves.
 photographs, and
 2. Their entire life cycle (flowers, pollination and seed dispersal) happens underwater.
 ideally highlighted for Internet
 1. Evolutionary 3. Estuarine versions can cope with varying salinities and being exposed to desiccation at low tides.
 study during
 trends 4. South African examples are estuarine, and include Zostera capensis and Thalassodendron ciliata,
 a field trip
 2. The both referred to as eel grass. (Provide photos and diagrams.)
 definitive Mangrove trees: These are more noteworthy but are limited to tropical and subtropical tidal estuaries,
 differences where they can form dense forests. Some common features include:
 between 1. An extensive root system to provide anchorage. Flower dissection
 phyla 2. Some roots which extend above the water level to enable gaseous exchange, either upright
 3. Specific outgrowths or loops (pneumatophores) or prop roots growing from the trunk above the high-
 adaptations, tide level.
 relating to 3. To deal with salt, some filter it out at the roots and add any excess to old leaves that are
 structures to dropped.
 functions 4. Others take in the salt water and have glands on their leaves to excrete a saline fluid.
 4. The richness 5. Most produce seeds with long spear-like outgrowths (hypocotl), enabling them to stab into the
 of marine mud and take root when dropped.
 biodiversity 6. SA examples are limited to northern KZN, and include the black (Bruguiera gymnorrhiza), white Fresh
 and (Avicennia marina) and red (Rhizophora mucronata) mangroves. (Photos and diagrams.) flowers
 5. Why it must 7. Illustrate and study reproduction in flowering plants, particularly mangroves, highlighting the
 be conserved flowers, pollination, mechanism of fertilisation, and production of seeds. Include suitable
 diagrams. Only general reproductive structures need to be known; do not give detail on
 alternation of generations.

102 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

49. Mollusca and Mollusc Classes
 Grade 10 Term 4 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 7 hours -Refer to the Phylogenetic tree to place this Phylum in its Evolutionary context. Photographs, slide
 The depth of this The molluscs are a very morphologically diverse group. show and videos
 topic is at a level (Use labelled diagrams to illustrate detail.)
 1. All are:
 where pupils
 a. Triploblastic, coelomate. Study live
 appreciate and b. Unsegmented. examples
 understand: c. Mainly bilaterally symmetrical. (aquarium or rock-
 d. At an organ level of organisation, all have a through gut, possess an open blood system and use muscle pool study) and
  Evolutionary contraction and hydrostatic pressure to move. shell collections
 trends 2. Most have:
  The definitive a. Soft body; divided into a head, foot, visceral mass and mantle; protected by externally secreted shell. Observation of as
 differences b. A radula tongue. many live species
 between phyla c. Ctenidial gills and osphradium. as possible, or
  Specific d. A reasonable level of cephalisation. arrange lesson or
 adaptations, 3. Some have: course with
 relating to a. A highly modified radula. nearest aquarium
 structures to b. Advanced nervous coordination.
 functions c. “Lungs”. Use a specific
  The richness of d. A reduced shell, modified internal shell or no shell. locally available
 marine 4. The different shapes and configurations of the shells (or the absence thereof) are the basis for the main example, but
 biodiversity distinction between classes, coupled with some significant aspects of anatomy. ensure ability to
 and a. Shells consist of three layers: periostracum (protein and organic mix), prismatic and nacreous (mostly CaCO3 recognise major
 Why it must be in various crystalline orientations). sub-groups or
 conserved b. All shell material is produced by cells in the mantle. classes and
 c. Shells enable protection, streamlining, storage of water, ability to burrow, and other innovations. defining
 5. Locomotion: characteristics
 a. Varies greatly, even within individual classes from sedentary, with various ways of attaching.
 b. to slow moving on a muscular foot. Incorporate into
 c. to floating, swimming and jet propulsion. ecosystem field Many YouTube
 6. Nervous coordination: trips Clips are available
 a. In many molluscs this function is fairly simple. to illustrate all the
 b. Molluscs have a cerebral ganglion and some sense organs (varies by class). defined and
 c. They have a double ventral cord with branches and limited ganglia. illustrated content
 7. Nutrition: on this topic
 a. The diet of molluscs varies hugely, as does the means to take in food.
 b. In all molluscs, once food enters the through gut, it travels through the oesophagus to a crop and stomach,
 and then to the intestine where absorption takes place.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 103
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 c. Salivary glands and a large digestive gland add enzymes for extracellular digestion.
 d. However, many molluscs have an elaborate sorting system and rely on intracellular digestion in tubes within
 the digestive gland.
 e. Herbivores have characteristically long guts (up to 8 times their body length).
 8. Circulation:
 a. An open blood system exists.
 b. This consists of a few reduced haemocoels and some blood vessels.
 c. Pigment haemocyanin or -globin is present in the plasma.
 d. A simple heart pumps blood through gills and around the body.
 9. Gaseous Exchange:
 a. Most molluscs have a chamber enclosed by the mantle in which gill-like structures are found.
 b. They are covered with a ciliated membrane.
 c. This membrane enables water to be directed in an opposite direction to the flow of blood inside the gills.
 d. This ability to “self-ventilate” is unique to molluscs and earns them a distinct title: Ctenidia.
 10. Excretion and osmoregulation:
 a. Vary with the lifestyle and habitat of the animal.
 b. Nephridial system in primitive classes.
 c. Most have a type of kidney, which regulates water balance and waste removal via a duct to the outside.
 11. Reproduction:
 a. Most molluscs are unisex.
 b. Fertilisation of eggs is external.
 c. Eggs hatch as meroplanktonic trochophore or veliger larvae.
 d. The larvae settle to the sea floor when they reach maturity.
 e. Some species, particularly cephalopods, have internal fertilisation and lay eggs, from which miniature adults
 hatch.

104 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Marine Mollusc Classes
Grade 10 Term 4 Strand – Marine Biology

Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
4 hours Polyplacaphora (chitons) Many
 The depth of this (Provide diagrams and photos only to highlight definitive features for each class.) YouTube
 topic is at a level 1. Chitons are limpet-like animals, which glue themselves to rocks in the same way: a large flexible foot Visit an Clips are
 Aquarium or available to
 where pupils secreting a thin layer of mucus.
 Shell illustrate all
 appreciate and 2. Their shell is divided into 8 plates, providing great flexibility and protection. museum to the defined
 understand: 3. They lack eyes or “feelers” on their head, but have numerous simple eyes within the periostracum. explore this and
 4. Most chitons spawn, leaving gametes to fend for themselves as planktonic larvae before settling as tiny incredibly illustrated
 1. Evolutionary versions of the adults. phylum content on
 trends Gastropods 1 (limpets, winkles, whelks and slugs) this topic
 2. The definitive
 1. These is by far the largest mollusc class, with some 35 000 species.
 differences
 between phyla 2. They are typical in structure, having a head with eyes and sensory tentacles, a large muscular foot, and a
 3. Specific twisted visceral mass above.
 adaptations, 3. The origin of this twisting is in the larval stage, resulting in a typically coiled shell and a figure-8 twist in most
 relating to of the internal systems (gut and nerve cord).
 structures to 4. This torsion twists the mantle cavity, gills and anus to the front, over the head. It is useful for the gills and
 functions
 osphradia (gills modified to be chemical sensors). It causes complications with regard to the anus and
 4. The richness of
 potential fouling of the gills.
 marine
 biodiversity 5. The problem has been solved by the development of a hole at the top, or holes along the side, modified gills
 and around the foot or a single modified gill on the inhalant side, and an anus on exhalent side.
 5. Why it must be 6. Most are herbivores, using the radula to rasp in small bits of plant. Carnivorous whelks have modified
 conserved radulas to break up food.
 7. Predatory whelks may also have modified salivary glands to secrete acids, with which they bore through
 shells of other molluscs.
 8. Cone shells have a sharp, venomous tooth-like radula.
 9. The bubble raft snail (Janthina sp.) floats with plankton community and feeds on bluebottles.
 10. The one class Pulmonates moved to land. Gills were lost and the vascular mantle cavity acts as a lung. Some
 returned to the ocean (False Limpet).
 Gastropods 2 (Sea slugs and nudibranchs)
 1. Have rudimentary shells, often under the skin or completely lost.
 2. They have a relatively bilateral structure and are thought to have burrowing ancestors; this helps them to
 dig and they require no protection; gills have been lost (having external gills would lead to them being fouled
 with sand or silt while burrowing)

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 105
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 3. On the surface they have re-evolved gills as finger-like folds on the skin or feathery folds around the anus; Dissection of
 these folds increase the surface area. They have also developed rhinophores instead of osphradia. a black
 4. Protect themselves with camouflage, poisonous secretions (bright warning colours) and even recycled mussel. A
 specimen
 stinging cells and spicules from their prey.
 may be
 5. All are hermaphroditic, laying internally fertilised eggs in mucous strings or sheets. collected and
 Bivalves (mussels, clams, oysters and scallops) euthanased
 1. This class is typified by having two shells joined with a hinge. Almost all are filter feeders, with the enlarged by
 pair of gills doubling up as filtration plants. The head and sense organs have been lost. refrigeration;
 2. Mussels may burrow in sand using a spade-like foot. Special siphons reach to the surface to bring in clean or download
 water. Others attach to rocks with byssal threads. and view
 3. Clams fasten to the substrate, oysters cement one shell to their home rock once the larvae settle, and virtual
 dissections
 scallops lie on the seabed (some swim using their shells as bellows).
 Cephalopods (Octopus, Squid, Cuttlefish and Nautilus) -They have heads and tentacles.
 1. This group has evolved from the basic plan to be fast-moving and distinctly bilateral.
 2. Foot has become tentacles; a mantle encloses the organs and is used to create jet propulsion. Fresh
 3. Shell can be external, internal, modified or absent. Squid mussels
 4. Tentacles catch prey, beak-like mouth cuts up the food. dissection,
 5. Cephalisation is advanced, with well-developed sense organs and nervous coordination. These are the most using Internet
 intelligent of invertebrates. purchased
 frozen squid;
 6. Most have a skin with chromatophores, iridiophores and papillae.
 or download
 7. Many have elaborate courtship rituals and internal fertilisation; they lay eggs that they might look after. virtual
 8. Nautilus – Closest to the fossil ancestors, with prominent multi-chamber shell. dissections
 9. Cuttlefish – Internal chalky shell with microscopic chambers.
 10. Fluid-filled chambers are a buoyancy aid: salt is extracted, pressure drops, and gas forms.
 11. Squid – Shell is reduced to a flexible pen. Buoyancy is achieved by means of ammonium concentration in
 tissue.
 Frozen squid
 12. Octopus – Has no shell at all. Hides in rock crevices, swims in an emergency. Masters of camouflage.
 Internet

106 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

50. Marine Life Cycles: Larvae
 Term 3 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 1 hour Marine Life 1. For most invertebrates and many fish species, once eggs have been Choose two animals having larval stages in their life Internet and YouTube
 Cycles: Larvae fertilised, they float with local currents or sink to the ocean floor. cycle, to illustrate the concept videos
 The Depth of this 2. Once hatched, there will be various motile larval stages.
 topic is at a level This could be a good section for students to investigate
 3. Different phyla have distinctive larvae, such as Planula,
 where learners further and prepare a short article or presentation
 understand Trochophore, Velliger, Nauplius and others (as discussed in the
 How various sections on individual phyla).
 organisms have 4. Generally these larvae circulate in the water column of the
 adapted to planktonic body, as meroplankton.
 different stages in 5. They then swim or settle out once they reach a particular stage or
 their life cycles for encounter the correct cue.
 survival purposes.
 6. Cues could be chemicals released by a suitable substrate, or adults
 of the same species.
 7. These complex planktonic life cycles make it very difficult to culture
 certain commercially important animals (such as rock lobsters).
 8. In some animals, eggs are kept on or in the body of an adult, to
 hatch before entering the planktonic circulation.
 9. Larval development strategies can be classified according to the
 length of time, if any, that the larva spends in planktonic circulation.
 10. Each strategy provides for different levels of distribution and
 ensures that developing larvae do not compete with the adult
 population for food.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 107
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

51. Bryozoa
 Term 3 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 1 hours -Refer to the Phylogenetic tree to place this Phylum in its Evolutionary context. Photographs,
 The depth of this Although regarded as a “minor phylum”, this classification refers more to the size of the organism than the slide show and
 topic is at a level distribution. Bryozoans are typically colonial, often polymorphic and form colonies that are flat sheets, upright videos
 folded sheets, or upright branched structures.
 where pupils
 1. The majority are tropical, but there are examples from almost all marine ecosystems.
 appreciate and 2. They grow on any available surface, especially where there is a current. They can be found on rock Study live
 understand: surfaces, mollusc shells, sea plant fronds, and the hulls of ships and boats. examples
 3. When they colonise man-made structures, they can cause drag and need to be cleaned off; hence they are (aquarium or
 1. Evolutionary known as fouling organisms. Some alien invasive species can be especially problematic. rock-pool study)
 trends 4. The colony consists of individuals termed zooids, often clones of a single individual.
 2. The definitive 5. Zooids are about 0.5 mm in size; they grow and divide rapidly and build up the colony in a pattern unique Observation of
 differences to each species. as many live
 between phyla 6. Colonies average 10 cm in extent, but range from 1 cm to more than 1 m. species as
 3. Specific 7. The most typical zooid in a colony is the feeding zooid (autozooid). possible, or
 adaptations, 8. Individual autozooids produce a box-like body wall (cystid), inside which they remain. arrange lesson
 relating to 9. The body wall material may be soft or contain CaCO3 (the latter resembling miniature corals). or course with
 structures to 10. Inside the cystid is a coelom containing the rest of the zooid (polypide). nearest
 functions 11. An opening on the top surface of the body wall enables the autozooid to extend a crown of cilia-covered aquarium Many YouTube
 4. The richness of tentacles (the lopophore) to filter feed particles into a central mouth. Clips are
 marine 12. There is a U-shaped through gut, leading to an anus just outside the lopophore. available to
 biodiversity 13. Other zooids in the colony (heterozooids) have specific modifications or appendages to help the colony illustrate all the
 and with: As a project, defined and
 5. Why it must be a) Protection Virtue discs can illustrated
 conserved b) Reproduction be cultured and content on this
 c) Colony growth bryozoan topic
 d) Water circulation across the colony colonies
 e) Cleaning off sediment deposits. identified

108 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

52. Population Dynamics
 Term 3 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 4 hours Population Population dynamics is the branch of life sciences that studies the size and age composition of populations as Population growth Many
 dynamics dynamic systems, and the biological and environmental processes that affect those populations (such as birth and simulations YouTube
 death rates, immigration and emigration). Clips are
 The Population Sustainable vs available to
 Key terms include demographics, population size, population density, population distribution and age structure
 Dynamics topic is unsustainable illustrate all
 Patterns of dispersion: the defined
 one for which resource harvesting
 1. Nucleated: near resources (food, shelter, living space) and good abiotic conditions. and
 discussions and
 2. Uniform or regular dispersion: through, for example, competition for territory (eg penguins). simulations and illustrated
 applications should
 3. Random dispersion: absence of strong attractions or repulsion. games content on
 be done at a deeper
 level. The content Population size is dynamic this topic
 should be applied 1. An increase occurs through births (natality) and immigration.
 as other Marine 2. A decrease occurs through deaths (mortality) and emigration. Deaths can be subdivided into natural
 Biology and Ecology causes versus predation or hunting and human-induced cause.
 topics are
 Zero population growth (excluding immigration or emigration) implies a balance between births and deaths.
 introduced.
 Key terms related to population growth:

 1. Birth rates, death rates and nett overall rate of growth in relation to a base population.
 2. Geometric or exponential growth patterns.
 3. Logistic growth curves, equations and carrying capacity (K).
 4. Predator–prey relationships.
 5. Variables that are either density-dependent (predation and overexploitation of resources – food, light
 and space) or density-independent.
 6. Resource fluctuation and variability.
 7. Age structure graphs.
 (Students should be able to discuss the above terms.)

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 109
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

53. South African Marine Ecosystems
 Term 3 Strand – Ecology
 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours SA Marine The Two Oceans of South Africa Many YouTube
 Ecosystems The ocean off the west coast of South Africa, as far as Cape Agulhas, is indicated as being the Atlantic Ocean, while the ocean off our Clips are
 eastern seaboard is the Indian Ocean. available to
 Learners should 1. This distinction is reinforced by both these coastlines experiencing two different major currents and very different weather illustrate all the
 understand the conditions. defined and
 South African 2. The warm Agulhas Current, one of the strongest flowing ocean currents in the world, moves at speeds up to 13 km/h. illustrated
 Context and 3. The Agulhas Current flows from Mozambique, past the KZN coast, before being deflected south-west by the Agulhas Bank. content on this
 conditions 4. This then turns south and back on itself in a series of eddies. topic
 under which 5. The largest eddy joins the Indian Ocean circulation, with smaller ones recirculating into the Agulhas current.
 Marine 6. Some eddies break off to move up the West Coast.
 Sciences can be 7. At the West Coast cold current moves northward, out of the Southern Ocean.
 researched. 8. This northward moving current is called the Benguela Current.
 This topic as Three fairly distinct coastal regions can be identified, based on water temperatures owing to the currents; these regions can be
 laid out in the further subdivided into five inshore biogeographic zones (BGZ) based on geographical features and distinctive local biodiversity:
 key concepts 1. Cold Temperate Region on the West Coast, with average temperatures ranging from 9 0C to 15 0C. This region is divided into
 should form the the Namaqua BGZ down to Cape Columbine, and the South Western Cape BGZ to Cape Point.
 basis upon a. Experiences frequent upwelling of cold nutrient-rich water. Investigate
 which case b. The nutrient-rich water promotes extensive phytoplankton blooms, coastal algae and kelp forests. endemic
 studies are c. In turn these provide food for large populations of consumers. species along
 contextualised. 2. Warm Temperate Region on the South Coast, with average temperatures ranging from 16 0C to 20 oC. Referred to as the the coast
 Agulhas BGZ.
 a. From Cape Point to just north of East London. Investigate
 b. This region fluctuates on a seasonal basis. endangered
 c. It often experiences an influx of colder water from the west along the shallower coastal shelf. species along
 d. There are some species overlaps with the bordering regions, but the warm temperate region has numerous endemic the coast
 species (eg Red Stumpnose, Knysna Seahorse, Leopard Catshark and Basket Star).
 3. Subtropical Region from East London into Mozambique, with average temperatures ranging from 18 0C to 27 oC. This region is
 subdivided into the Natal BGZ up to St Lucia, and the Delagoa BGZ further to the north.
 a. Water in the Agulhas Current is nutrient-poor.
 b. Prevailing onshore winds cause downwelling, maintaining nutrient-poor conditions.
 c. Algae are low-growing (tend to be moss-like, carpeting most rocks) and often coralline (cells incorporate CaCO3 which
 makes the algae hard and unpalatable). However, the species diversity is very high.
 d. Animal species diversity is also high, but population sizes are smaller.
 e. Coastal fish exhibit tropical characteristics, such as being generally smaller and very colourful.
 Further BGZs are identified in deeper water, beyond the continental fringe to the end of the South African Economic Exclusion Zone.
 (Not required for the scope of this course.)

110 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

54. The Open Ocean
 Term 3 Strand – Ecology
 Time Investigations Resources
 2 hours Individual General Blue Planet
 ecosystems Large sections of the mid oceanic environments can be termed deserts, as nutrient levels are low and subsequent food chains limited. and other
 should be viewed Closer to coastal margins, and particularly on continental shelves, conditions are more dynamic and complex communities evolve. documentary
 with reference to 1. Most oceanic food chains start with phytoplankton, which require light and nutrients to thrive. excerpts
 the ecological 2. Nutrient supplies may become restricted off the South Coast by the formation of a thermocline in summer, limiting abundant
 concepts phytoplankton populations to spring, early summer and autumn. Provide
 introduced in 3. The West Coast experiences regular fluctuations in nutrient supplies and subsequent phytoplankton blooms due to worksheet and
 Gr10 and highlight upwelling. questions
 the unique 4. The East Coast has smaller but relatively stable phytoplankton populations, owing to a constant supply of warm relatively
 components and nutrient-poor water all year. The worksheet
 interactions Planktonic food webs should include
 within each. Whenever the phytoplankton populations increases, the consumer chain will increase as well. supplementary
 1. Zooplankton (including radiolarians, foraminiferans and copepods) float with phytoplankton and feed on them. notes
 Understanding of 2. Close to coastlines, the larvae of coastal invertebrates and fish may temporarily join the zooplankton (as meroplankton).
 the complexity of 3. All are fed on by larger carnivores such as krill, jellies, bluebottles and small fish.
 4. These carnivores in turn become food for schools of pelagic fish like pilchards, mackerel, anchovies and maasbanker.
 ecosystems is
 5. The next step up in the food chain is schools of dolphins and predatory fish like tuna, hake, yellowtail and elf (shad).
 critical for 6. Sea birds such as gannets, cormorants and penguins also feed off the fish.
 learning about the 7. The Southern Ocean experiences huge summer productivity, giving rise to planktonic explosions of krill in particular.
 multi disciplinarily Many
 8. These provide an abundant food supply for many larger animals, including whales.
 YouTube
 of Marine 9. Many of these whales migrate to the South African coastline in winter, to mate and calve.
 Clips are
 Sciences. Class 10. Southern Right and Humpback Whales are examples.
 available
 discussions, field 11. They live off fat reserves built up during the summer feeding season.
 to
 Pelagic fish
 trips and projects illustrate
 Variable nutrient supplies around our coastline dictate the distribution of pelagic fish.
 should be used to all the
 1. Two main factors lead to a far richer food supply along the West Coast:
 integrate defined
 a) The generally higher nutrient content of water from the Benguela Current.
 ecosystem studies and
 b) Frequent summer upwelling events along the western shoreline.
 illustrated
 and other 2. The rich food supply results in a potential abundance of pelagic fish along the West Coast.
 content
 appropriate topics 3. The cold nutrient-rich water often extends along the continental shelf of the South Coast.
 on this
 in this curriculum. 4. The pelagic schools follow up as far as Mossel Bay or even further during sardine runs.
 topic
 5. The East Coast, with relatively stable conditions and warm water, has a much lower abundance of pelagic schools.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 111
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

55. Shores – Introduction
 Term 3 Strand – Ecology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 4 hours Individual In coastal areas, land and sea are joined in an area called a shore. Visit a shore
 Shores ecosystems or arrange a
 intro and should be viewed 1. The coast is an active place. Waves break and release their energy. skype call
 Rocky with reference to 2. Tides bring water onto the land that reaches the high tide mark – the extreme point being the spring high tide mark. with
 Shores the ecological 3. The shore is the area on land between spring low and spring high levels, also referred to as the intertidal zone. someone
 concepts who has easy
 4. This section of the shore is either fully covered at spring high tide or uncovered at spring low tide.
 introduced in access to the
 Gr10 and 5. The water level fluctuates between these two points twice during a day. shore
 highlight the
 unique
 components and Living
 interactions Shores by
 within each. George
 Branch

112 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Rocky Shores
 Term 3 and 4 Strand – Ecology

Time Depth Key concepts Investigations Resources
4 hours Individual Rocky shore Id sheets;
Shores ecosystems Rocky Shore ecosystems are characterised by the following features: study- square
intro & should be 1. They are covered by water and exposed to air as tides change. Incorporate id quadrats (or
Rocky viewed with sheets for round ones
 2. Have a rock substrate.
Shores reference to animals and made from
 the ecological 3. The rock exhibits exposed and sheltered surfaces as well as eroded gullies and holes according to the parent material, algae; string)
Continued concepts aspect and strata of the rock. Mapping of a
Gr 11 introduced in 4. The eroded areas fill with water to form rock pools. rock pool; Rope for
Term 4 Gr10 and 5. Many marine creatures can inhabit these rock pools, but require some adaptations to unique abiotic conditions; specifically quadrat transect
Another highlight the high light intensities and fluctuating temperatures and salinities. The higher the pool is on the shore, the greater these studies and lines.
4 hours unique stresses will be. line transects
 components to see zonal Tape
 6. As tides rise and fall the exposed areas experience rapidly changing combinations of temperature, salinity, moisture, pH,
 and species measures.
 interactions dissolved O2 and food supply. distribution. Photographs
 within each. 7. Organisms must cope with periods of desiccation, extreme temperature fluctuations, rain, wave action, sea water flow, and
 turbulence, and predation by land animals – especially sea birds. Collect (for diagrams to
 Understanding 8. Where several organisms occupy an area, particularly in the lower shore where abiotic factors are less stressful, there is return after show
 of the more competition for space and food. These biotic interactions further influence the distribution of organisms in the mid session) intertidal
 specific algae zonation
 complexity of to lower shore.
 and animals
 ecosystems is 9. An organism’s adaptation to cope with specific abiotic stresses in rocky shore areas determines the distribution of that relating to
 critical for organism in the mid to high shore zones. this
 learning about 10. High shore species are: curriculum.
 the multi a) Relatively tolerant to desiccation and temperature extremes (which are normally higher than in the surrounding
 disciplinarily ocean).
 of Marine b) Generally poorly adapted to dealing with heavy wave action and predation.
 Sciences. Middle shore species are:
 Class a) adapted to survive limited desiccation
 discussions, b) exposed to and adapted for dealing with wave action, turbulence, and predation by marine organisms.
 field trips and Lower shore species are:
 projects a) Out of the water for limited times only.
 should be b) Not well adapted to desiccation.
 used to c) Able to tolerate heavy wave action, by being firmly anchored and streamlined.
 integrate d) Well adapted to compete for food and space.
 ecosystem e) Adapted to avoid predation by other marine organisms.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 113
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 studies and 11. There is strong evidence to suggest that organisms in the lower shore are also distributed according to specific feeding,
 other competitive and symbiotic interactions, rather than purely adaptations to stress. Examples include barnacles competing
 appropriate for space, limpets grazing all algae around them except those they “cultivate”, and predatory sea stars limiting where
 topics in this mussels can establish themselves.
 curriculum. 12. Biologists have noted a clearly visible vertical zonation pattern or intertidal zonation. Each zone has specific resident
 species, with the name of each zone often indicating one of them.
 13. Zonation is the defining feature of rocky shores. (Photographs and diagrams to show intertidal zonation.)
 14. The resident species may differ on different coastlines, depending on the overall characteristics of the bordering ocean.
 15. Typical rocky shore zonation exhibits three generic zones:
 These are roughly demarcated by the high and low tide marks and the tidal mean. The term eulittoral is often used to
 describe the intertidal zone.
 a) The upper eulittoral zone, around the spring high tide mark, bordering on the spray or splash zone, is
 characterised by small winkles.
 b) The middle eulittoral zone, approximately between neap low and neap high tide marks, is characterised by
 barnacles, limpets and larger winkles – amongst many other invertebrates and algae. This zone is often divided
 into upper and lower zones around the tidal mean.
 c) The lower eulittoral zone, around the spring low tide mark, has more algae and wave-resistant animals such as
 limpets and mussels, as well as soft-bodied animals in calmer water.
 16. In South Africa, these zones can be renamed according to the common species in each zone:
 a. The upper eulittoral is the littorina zone, characterised by small winkles, especially Afrolittorina Africana.
 b. The mid eulittoral zone is divided into two:
 I. The upper balanoid zone is named after the acorn barnacle family, Balanidae. The zone falls around the neap high
 point, down to the tidal mean. It has more animals than algae, including winkles, limpets and barnacles.
 II. The lower balanoid zone is below the tidal mean to around the neap low point. It has fewer barnacles (being the
 lower extent of their range) but more limpets, winkles and mussels, and far more algae.
 c. The lower eulittoral is distinct on each coastline, varying from a specialised extension of the balanoid on the East Coast
 to a limpet belt on the South and West Coasts.
 d. Additional zones in the SA coastline: For each coastline, an additional zone is noticeable in the intertidal area.
 I. On the East Coast there is a band of oysters towards the top of the upper balanoid, the oyster belt. There are also
 large zoanthid colonies in the lower balanoid and into the lower eulittoral.
 II. On the South Coast there is an additional band of pear-shaped limpets in the lower eulittoral, the cochlear zone.
 The littorina zone also has the addition of the algae purple laver (also found on the West Coast).
 III. On the West Coast, the cochlear zone also features increasing proportions of another limpet (which is dome-
 shaped), making this the cochlear or argenvillei zone. Moving west, algae become far more prominent.

114 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Sandy Beaches
 Term 4 Strand – Ecology

Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
2 hours Individual Meiofauna
theory ecosystems Large sections of the South African coastline have sandy beaches overlying deep bedrock. They are also thriving investigation
+2 hours should be ecosystems:
practical viewed with 1. Beaches are unstable, made up of sand particles which are constantly in motion. Many activities can
 reference to 2. Sandy shores provide no hard substrate for organisms to attach themselves. be developed with
 the ecological 3. The shores are too unstable for sea plants to grow; animals here burrow into the sand. Tubes are a beach excursion .
 concepts
 created in sheltered environments with finer sand, while animals push between the coarse sand particles
 introduced in
 in more turbulent environments.
 Gr10 and
 highlight the 4. The size and frequency of waves determine whether beaches are eroded or built up.
 unique 5. Beaches subject to energetic conditions have larger sand grains; calmer conditions deposit finer grains.
 components 6. Coarse sand drains quickly but allows air to penetrate.
 and 7. Very fine sand retains its moisture but excludes oxygen. Organic material is trapped and broken down
 interactions by abiotic bacteria, releasing hydrogen sulphide – not an ideal environment for burrowers.
 within each.
 8. Animals aggregate to a beach with conditions to which they are adapted, generally avoiding very coarse
 or fine extremes.
 Understanding
 9. Burrowing enables them to avoid predators, extreme wave action, high temperatures and desiccation,
 of the
 while still finding ample dissolved oxygen.
 complexity of
 10. All organic matter available to animals in the sandy shore drifts in with the tide or by wave action.
 ecosystems is
 11. Some animals feed on organic particles and decomposition bacteria that drain through the sand, and
 critical for
 others emerge to scavenge the shoreline for dead plants and animals.
 learning about
 the multi Commonly found intertidal beach animals
 disciplinarily of Upper shore: Animals that burrow into sand in the upper shore generally breathe air.
 Marine 1. Sand hoppers (Talorchestia sp.) and giant pill bugs (Tylos sp.) are common on the West and South Many
 Sciences. Class Coasts, where dislodged kelp and other sea plants are deposited by the high tide. These animals – YouTube
 discussions, a. Burrow in the sand or shelter in the rotting plants. Clips are
 field trips and b. Emerge at low tide, at night, and seek out plants to feed on. available to
 projects should 2. They are replaced on the East Coast by the ghost crab (Ocypode spp.), which – illustrate all
 be used to the defined
 a. Is a scavenger with similar habits to the sand hopper and giant pill bug, but feeds on dead
 integrate and
 animals. illustrated
 ecosystem b. Burrows deep enough to rest in wet sand. content on
 studies and c. Emerges to scavenge on damp sand. this topic
 other

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 115
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 appropriate Middle shore: Apart from several small crustaceans, mainly copepods, this zone is typified by the plough snail
 topics in this (Bullia spp). Plough snails –
 curriculum. a. Prefer moderate wave action and water with little turbulence. They emerge with the rising tide to
 “surf” to the high tide mark, where dead animals can be found and fed on.
 b. Have an excellent sense of smell that guides them to food.
 c. Retreat with the tide to burrow back into the mid tide sand.

 Low shore: Animals shelter in the sand at the low tide mark and migrate up the beach as the tide rises.
 1. White Mussels (Donax spp) move in the sand, filtering out microscopic organic material that is deposited
 by rising waves.
 2. Small surf shrimps (Gastrosaccus sp) swim in the turbulent water behind the rising tide to scoop up
 dead plant and animal material.
 3. The mole crab or sand louse (Emerita sp) emerges to be rolled by the rising tide and kept in the
 turbulent water, which is rich in food and organic matter.
 4. All these animals return to the low tide mark with the tide and bury themselves again.

 Sandy shores are significant nutrient cyclers
 1. Huge populations of bacteria and microscopic animals (protists and simple worms) inhabit the spaces
 between sand particles.
 2. These small organisms are termed meiofauna.
 3. Bacteria break down organic particles to release nutrients.
 4. In well aerated soil this happens quickly.
 5. Some bacteria-covered particles are food for protists and worms.
 6. Their faeces and wastes are broken down further by bacteria.
 7. The released nutrients leach into the sea to feed phytoplankton.
 8. Thus, much organic material is efficiently broken down as it filters through sand. This is the meiofaunal
 food chain, which is independent of the macrofaunal food chain (larger animals).

116 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

56. Echinoderms and Echinoderm Classes
 Term 4 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 6 hours -Refer to the Phylogenetic tree to place this Phylum in its Evolutionary context. Photographs, https://study.com/academy/lesson/echinodermata
 The depth of this The variety between the classes is huge, but the general anatomy and physiology is similar across the slide show and -respiratory-system.html
 topic is at a level phylum. Exceptions will be dealt with per class. (Use labelled diagrams to illustrate detail.) videos https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n4uDD5-mD-Q
 where pupils
 1. Symmetry:
 appreciate and a. Bilateral larvae. Study live
 understand: b. Larvae give rise to pentaradially symmetrical adults. examples
 2. Most can regenerate limbs and organs. (aquarium or
  Evolutionary 3. Body plan: rock-pool
 trends a. Triploblastic coelomates. study)
  The definitive b. The coelom forms several fluid-filled compartments.
 differences c. These compartments include a water vascular system which controls tube feet or podia. Observation of
 between 4. Ectoderm: as many live
 phyla a. The ectoderm gives rise to a skin covering CaCO3 ossicles or plates held together by collagen species as
  Specific fibres and other proteins. possible, or
 adaptations, b. The amount of space between the plates is specific to each class. arrange lesson
 relating to c. Skin can incorporate spines and nippers. or course with
 structures to 5. Locomotion: nearest
 functions a. All are slow moving, using tube feet. aquarium
  The richness b. Almost sessile.
 of marine c. Varies per class. Use a specific
 biodiversity 6. Nervous coordination: locally
 and a. There is a loosely arranged network of nerves feeding each arm or sector. available
 Why it must b. No centralised ganglion. example, but
 be conserved c. Sensitive to light, touch and chemical substances. ensure ability
 7. Nutrition: to recognise
 a. Most groups have a through gut. major sub-
 b. Gut branches into arms (gastric caecae with digestive glands). groups or
 c. Intake depends on group. classes and
 d. All have the ability to extract organic compounds from the surrounding water into the skin. defining
 8. Circulation: characteristics
 a. The coelom and water vascular system are ciliated and contain proteins and coelomocytes.
 b. The cilia circulate the fluid and this enables transport of substances. Incorporate
 9. Gaseous exchange: into ecosystem
 a. Diffusion from water in the water vascular system and coelomic pouches. field trips
 b. Special adaptations may exist to increase surface area.
 c. Tube feet are part of this system.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 117
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 10. Excretion:
 a. No specific organs exist.
 b. Phagocytic coelomocytes in the coelom engulf wastes and exit through vascular system and
 gut.
 c. Chemical wastes can be excreted through exposed tube feet.
 d. Osmoregulation does not occur (Stenohaline vs Euryhaline).
 11. Reproduction:
 a. As with most examples so far, spawning is common.
 b. Spawning includes a bilaterally symmetrical planktonic larval stage (settling as a small adult).
 c. There are a variety of unique larval stages, normally named according to the individual class.
 d. Some species have internal fertilisation and retain the eggs. Hatched offspring later emerge
 as advanced larvae or tiny adults.

118 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Echinoderm classes
 Term 4 Strand – Marine Biology

Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

4 hours Asteroidea: Sea Stars or Starfish Photographs, slide show
 The depth of this 1. Classic pentaradial layout. and videos
 topic is at a level 2. Skin has dorsal papillae, short spines and pedicellaria. Many YouTube
 where pupils 3. Mouth on under-surface. Clips are available
 Study live examples to illustrate all the
 appreciate and 4. Feed by extruding part of the stomach to partially or totally digest food outside. (aquarium or rock-pool defined and
 understand: 5. Have eye spots and very sensitive tube feet at arm ends. study) illustrated
 6. Move by means of tube feet in ambulacral groove. content on this
 1. Evolutionary Ophiuroidea: Brittle Stars Observation of as many topic
 trends 7. Central disc with loose skin, thin arms with vertebral plates and spines. live species as possible,
 2. The definitive or arrange lesson or
 8. Tube feet are reduced to tentacles (podia) and these aid in sensing and feeding.
 differences course with nearest
 between phyla 9. Move by dragging themselves with legs.
 aquarium
 3. Specific 10. Most filter feed; some scavenge larger meals. Mouth is situated underneath and there is no anus.
 There are very
 adaptations, 11. Young may be reared in brooding pouches. Use a specific locally valuable
 relating to Crinoidea: Feather Stars available example, but
 structures to Aquarium videos
 12. They have many thin, upward-facing arms; a small central disc with mouth and anus, facing upwards. ensure ability to
 functions recognise major sub- which are readily
 13. Cling to substrate using special cirri.
 4. The richness of groups or classes and available
 marine 14. Arms have pinnules, with small podia or tube feet and cilia.
 defining characteristics
 biodiversity 15. Filter feed small particles, encasing them in mucus and pass food down to mouth.
 and 16. Gonads are situated in the lower pinnules. Incorporate into
 5. Why it must be Echinoidea: Sea Urchins ecosystem field trips
 conserved 17. Pentaradial symmetry is not immediately noticeable but is obvious on closer inspection.
 18. Ossicles are enlarged with very little connective protein to form a teste.
 19. Skin has spines and a range of pedicellaria or nippers.
 20. The spines are used for protection and “walking’.
 21. Tube feet penetrate through the teste; the urchin holds on and drags its body. Mouth is underneath, with 5
 prominent teeth, and the anus is on top. Omnivorous.
 22. Water vascular system extends into folds to form “gills”.
 Holothuroidea: Sea Cucumbers
 23. The Sea cucumber exhibits a more bilateral symmetry, but the Pentaradial ancestry can be seen in the rows of
 tube feet.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 119
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 24. There are fewer ossicles under the skin than in the Sea stars, but comparatively more collagen and elastic
 fibres.
 25. Tube feet to hold on; modified around mouth to form sticky tentacles.
 26. Sea cucumbers feed by using their tentacles to catch small particles.
 27. They have a through gut.
 28. Respiratory tree extends from cloaca into body: contains sea water and aids gaseous exchange.

120 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

57. Human Exploitation of Marine Resources and Indigenous Knowledge
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Ocean

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours A broad Archaeological Evidence of early human relationships with the sea and seafood. Museums and A range of YouTube
 overview of Archaeological sites display clips and resources
 understanding 1. South Coast Our Prehistorical Birthplace an enormous amount which are available in
 of South 2. Early human reliance on the coast can be visited and further Archeologic
 African 3. Middens displaying evidence of sea food consumption by early humans enrichment dealt with. libraries and on the
 Scientists to 4. Prehistoric Resource Depletion internet.
 Visit Vywers and fish traps
 the Marine 5. Middens displaying evidence of sea food consumption by early humans George Branch
 Arniston or Stilbaai
 Sciences. The 6. Reference to marine materials in middens Living Shores 2018
 history of 7. Stone wall fish traps vyfers on the South Coast and the Norhern KZN fish traps in Kozi Bay. Or the N KZN in the Kosi Bay pg 204.
 Marine 8. Reference to quality proteins that came from eating food from the sea. area. see prehistoric
 Science resource depletion
 discovery pg 206 Reliance on
 should the coast
 encourage pg 207 and see
 learners to South Coast: Our
 make a ancestral
 contribution birthplace.
 themselves in
 the future.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 121
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

58. Overfishing and SASSI
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Investigations Resources
 2 hours The depth at Overfishing Using the SASSI App SASSI cards
 which this 1. Three specific areas need to be studied when considering humans and the sustainable use and management Discussions and and App
 topic should of South African oceans: activities considering http://wwfsa
 be a. Aquaculture of marine species. the variables used to ssi.co.za/sassi
 understood is b. Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). calculate the SASSI -app/
 one in which c. Marine ecotourism. guidelines.
 learners as well as the
 2. Marine scientists are working to develop a scientific basis for making management decisions and restoring
 should apply Investigate a case Marine
 certain fish stocks to sustainable levels.
 their study in which a Stewardship
 3. Solutions for overfishing include:
 knowledge of scenario is laid out Council
 a. Fish only what is consumed.
 other topics for consideration for https://www.
 studied up to b. Stop incurring bycatch or incidental mortality. a Green, orange or msc.org/
 this point. In c. Fishing companies and fishermen must follow fishing legislation – such as quotas, total allowable red listed species. material and
 addition this catches and permit conditions. web sites.
 topic will d. Establish no-take zones.
 form as a e. Develop marine protected areas (MPAs). http://wwfsa
 frame of f. Change equipment so habitat destruction is reduced. ssi.co.za/
 reference as George
 g. Identify habitats that should not be touched by harvesting equipment.
 further topics Branch Living
 in the Ecology h. Prevent use of destructive fishing gear (eg circle hooks and trawling nets). Shores 2018
 and Humans 4. Seafood consumer awareness programmes such as the Marine Stewardship Council and the South African pg 211.
 and the Sustainable Seafood Initiative (MSC, SASSI) Harvesting of
 Ocean strands These programmes propose a set of sustainable measures which require compliance by participating the seas
 are companies, or a consumer awareness initiative requiring consumers to establish:
 introduced. a. What species is the seafood?
 The topic b. Where was it caught?
 lends itself to c. How was it caught?
 higher level d. Has it been listed as a Green, Orange or Red by marine scientists?
 solutions e. What do FishSMS and websites say about the species?
 based
 applications Note: Research also indicates that not all changes in fish stocks are the result of human over-exploitation.

122 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

59. Marine Protected Areas
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours The depth at Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are areas of the oceans that are protected for a Explore no take MPAs verses https://www.envi
 which this topic conservation purpose. limited catch MPAs. Investigate ronment.gov.za/
 should be 1. Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) are one of the measures positively contributing to MPAs in other countries and the
 understood is protect marine environments, enabling sustainable use of marine resources and associated data. mediarelease/mo
 one in which ensuring that the areas remain healthy for generations to come. lewa_22newprop
 learners should 2. MPAs are selected areas where human activities are restricted by regulations. This osed_mpas
 apply their provides special protection in the area for the conservation of a species, a habitat or
 knowledge of an ecosystem, and cultural resources such as shipwrecks and archaeological sites as
 other topics identified by scientists.
 studied up to this 3. MPAs differ by country and take many differing forms – such as marine sanctuaries,
 point. In addition estuarine research reserves, ocean parks, and marine wildlife refuge zones.
 this topic will 4. Scientists propose areas where MPAs should be established, based on Guidelines
 form as a frame a) Places which are critically important to specific developmental stages of marine for
 of reference as species (eg feeding, spawning and nursery areas).
 further topics in b) Areas rich in biodiversity and zones where important cultural artefacts are found. Establishing
 the Ecology and 5. MPAs provide undisturbed sites for scientific research and benchmarking that allows Marine
 Humans and the long-term monitoring, which helps to guide management of fishery resources in
 Ocean strands Protected
 exploited areas.
 are introduced.
 6. South Africa has 22 proposed MPAs under the Operation Phakisa initiative. In South Areas
 The topic lends By Graeme Kelleher,
 Africa, MPAs are “no-take” zones.
 itself to higher
 7. The resources in these protected areas become replenished and fish stocks recover R. A. Kenchington,
 level solutions
 inside, and act as a spill-over to surrounding areas, improving their fisheries. Female Great Barrier Reef
 based
 fish in MPAs grow older and larger than fish outside of MPAs, and are able to produce Marine Park
 applications
 eggs that are both healthier and more numerous, providing efficient breeding.
 Authority
 8. The Tsitsikamma MPA, at the Storms River mouth, can be used as a case study of a
 MPA which if opened will have dire consequences for certain fish stocks.
 9. Key benefits of MPAs are therefore –
 a. Conserving representative samples of marine biodiversity and ecosystems.
 b. Protecting critical habitats for the reproduction and growth of species.
 c. Supporting marine species’ growth areas to allow for “spill-over” into
 surrounding exploited areas.
 d. Maintaining biodiversity and providing refuges for endangered and commercial
 species.
 e. Protecting critical habitats from damage by destructive fishing practices and
 other human activities, and allowing them to recover.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 123
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 f. Allowing sensitive ocean areas to recover from the stresses of exploitation, so
 that fish are able to reproduce, spawn and grow to their adult size.
 g. Increasing fish catches (both size and quantity) in surrounding fishing grounds.
 h. Building resilience to protect against damaging external impacts, such as climate
 change.
 i. Helping to maintain local cultures, economies, and livelihoods that are intricately
 linked to the marine environment.
 j. Contributing to healthy marine sites for sustainable and responsible ecotourism
 and environmental education.

124 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

60. Marine Ecotourism
 Term 4 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 4 hours The depth at Introduction to Ecotourism opportunities along the coast Investigate local marine Videos relating to marine
 which this topic and coastal tour operators ecotourism, such as marine tour
 should be 1. Nature-based tourism takes tourists to natural venues; this is the largest growing tourism sector in South guiding, shark cage diving, whale
 understood is Africa. watching, shore studies and
 one in which 2. According to The International Ecotourism Society, ecotourism is defined as "responsible travel to natural In a project, explore botanical touring
 learners should areas that conserves the environment, sustains the well-being of the local people, and involves opportunities for
 apply their interpretation and education of guests and staff" (TIES, 2015). ecotourism that might not https://www.ecotourism.org/
 knowledge of 3. Ecotourism is based on the following principles, as set out by TIES: yet have been attempted
 other topics a. Minimise physical, social, behavioural, and psychological impacts. in a local community
 studied up to this b. Build environmental awareness, cultural awareness and respect.
 point. In c. Provide positive experiences for both visitors and hosts.
 Explore comparative
 addition this d. Provide direct financial benefits for conservation.
 settings in other countries,
 topic will form as e. Generate financial benefits for both local people and private industry.
 to stimulate discussion
 a frame of f. Deliver memorable interpretative experiences to visitors, thus raising sensitivity to host
 about local
 reference as countries' political, environmental, and social climates.
 g. Design, construct and operate low-impact facilities. entrepreneurial
 further topics in
 opportunities
 the Ecology and h. Recognise the rights and spiritual beliefs of indigenous people in the community and work in
 Humans and the partnership with them to create empowerment.
 Ocean strands i. Implement practices that are sustainable ("meets the needs of the present without compromising
 are introduced. the ability of the future generations to meet their own needs"; Bruntland Commission, 1987).
 The topic lends j. With this concept in mind, sustainable tourism was defined in the 1992 Agenda 21 for the Travel
 itself to higher and Tourism Industry as tourism that "meets the needs of present tourists and host regions while
 level solutions protecting and enhancing opportunities for the future."
 based 4. MPAs function as ideal areas to provide income from recreation and ecotourism to subsidise conservation
 applications efforts.
 5. Tour guides should deliver accurate information and keep their knowledge current with recent
 information about the species, ecosystems and biological values of the region.
 6. Efforts have been made to use the ocean for tourism and to promote ocean awareness, by operators of:
 a. aquariums
 b. shark cage diving
 c. surfing

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 125
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 d. free-diving with seals
 e. recreational fishing
 f. boat sight-seeing trips
 g. whale watching.
 7. Many of these initiatives have been drivers for better conservation through –
 a. Protection in demarcated MPAs.
 b. Conducting strict environmental impact assessment procedures before allowing coastal
 development to occur.

 A number of regulations govern tour operations along the SA coast, which require adherence to activities such
 as fishing quotas and permits for activities such as fishing and scuba diving. These regulations are aimed at
 increasing sustainable tourism practices.

126 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Section 3.3 Grade 12

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 127
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

61. Diving Science Water Gas Laws
 Term 1 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours The gas laws Combined Gas Laws Examples of diving science Bicycle pump
 include 1. Boyles and Charles Laws illustrate the relationship between pressure, volume
 opportunities for and temperature. Pressure at a depth Air cylinder (to
 problem solving (calculate) demonstrate the
 2. For a fixed amount of an ideal gas kept at a fixed temperature, the pressure and
 by applying the release of air
 content to real volume are inversely proportional. Demonstrate the relationship reduces
 examples which 3. Room temperature should be constant. between volume, pressure temperature)
 are used in the 4. [Volume x pressure] is a constant. and temperature
 Science of Diving 5. P1V1/T1= P2V2/T2 tube graduated
 by commercial 6. Changing subjects of the formula with Boyles Law. Increased pressure in a according to the
 divers in the 7. Teach the concept of converting degrees Kelvin to degrees Centigrade. bicycle pump increases the volume
 field. temperature

 Air released from a cylinder
 reduces the temperature

128 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

62. Estuaries
 Term 1 Strand – Ecology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 3 hours Individual Estuaries are river mouths and their associated banks and beds, which are subject to the tidal ebb and flow of Practical Models
 ecosystems the sea water they discharge into. investigation:
 should be viewed 1. Estuaries are home to unique plant and animal communities that have adapted to brackish water – a test pH of water; Charts
 with reference to test salinity
 mix of fresh water (draining from the land) and salty sea water.
 the ecological Pictures
 concepts 2. The length of the estuary stretches from the mouth of the river as far back as salt water can still be Effect of human
 introduced in detected. activity on salinity Live
 Gr10 and 3. Conditions fluctuate considerably, with changes in tides and seasonal river discharge. specimens
 highlight the 4. The rivers are in their lower course and normally flow calmly. Sand bars form at the river mouth, Effect of seasonal
 unique protecting the estuary from turbulent wave action. As a result, changes to pH and
 components and a. Deposition of river sediment and sea sand is promoted. salinity
 interactions
 b. The deposition results in broad tidal sand, silt or mud flats.
 within each.
 c. Many coastal marine species that favour calm water live here.
 Understanding of d. This area is an important breeding ground and nursery for juvenile line fish.
 the complexity of 5. Salinity fluctuates substantially, with salt water entering at high tide and fresh water flowing down
 ecosystems is the river during rainy seasons in the catchment area.
 critical for a. The salinity gradient changes moving upstream, but also with depth, as freshwater flows over
 the denser salt water and mixing is slow. Investigate
 learning about different species of
 the multi b. When estuaries become closed because of a lack of river discharge and the formation of sand
 plant and animals
 disciplinarily of bars across the river mouth, estuarine salinity may increase well above that of the sea, owing to found in an estuary
 Marine Sciences. evaporation. Life Cycle of animals
 Class discussions, c. Animals have a range of adaptations to deal with salinity changes. that use estuaries
 d. They are referred to as euryhaline – able to cope with a wide range of salinity. as breeding
 field trips and
 6. Temperature ranges can also be much more extreme than in the ocean. grounds
 projects should Adaptation of
 be used to a. Animals dig into the sediment or create water-filled burrows to avoid high temperatures and
 animals to survive
 integrate desiccation (eg sand or mud prawns, blood worms and mussels). changes in salinity
 ecosystem b. The many scavengers on exposed flats have adaptations to enable them to breathe, regulate
 studies and other temperature and avoid desiccation (eg crabs).
 appropriate 7. A high organic load exists in the water and sediment.
 topics in this a. Organic load results in a thriving decomposition process, releasing nutrients.
 curriculum. b. Most of the burrowing animals are filter feeders.
 8. Adapted land plants thrive, such as reeds in relatively fresh water, salt-resistant plants on the higher
 shore, and eel grass on the intertidal flats.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 129
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 a. In sub-tropical and tropical areas, mangroves can establish themselves.
 b. These plants help to calm water turbulence and promote sedimentation.
 c. Estuaries are among the most productive ecosystems in the world.
 9. Many marine animals, especially fish, enter estuaries to spawn; or juvenile fish move into estuaries
 after hatching.
 a. Examples include Kabeljou, Garrick or Leervis, Mullet, Grunter and White Steenbras.
 b. The young fish hatch and/or mature in the estuary.
 10. Estuaries provide a perfect habitat for water birds. Some are permanent residents, others seasonal
 migrators.

130 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

63. Chordata Urochordata
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology
 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 2 hours Revise life patterns and classification Photographs, slide Charts
 The depth of this show and videos illustrating
 -Refer to the Phylogenetic tree to place this Phylum in its Evolutionary context. Introduce a new
 topic is at a level cladograms
 Phylogenetic tree for the Chordate Phylum.
 where pupils 1. The phylum Chordata –
 Study live examples Phylogenetic
 appreciate and a. Includes all animals with a tubular dorsal nerve cord.
 (aquarium or rock-pool diagrams
 understand: b. The nerve cord is supported by some sort of protective rod, a notochord.
 study)
 c. The notochord might, however, be present only in the larval stages.
 Time frame to
 1. Evolutionary 2. The sub-phylums Urochordata and Cephalochordata have no vertebral column, and are thus
 Observation of as many origin of
 trends invertebrates, often referred to as protochordates.
 live species as possible, organisms
 2. The definitive or arrange lesson or
 differences Urochordates: Ascidiacea or Tunicates
 course with nearest
 between phyla 1. This group is significant on our shores, thus requires discussion.
 aquarium
 3. Specific 2. Only the tadpole-like larva has the required notochord and dorsal nerve cord.
 adaptations, 3. The adult is glued to one spot and becomes a bag-like structure with a tunic of jelly or cellulose. Use a specific locally
 relating to 4. A through gut exists, taking water in through one tube or siphon and expelling it out through the available example, but
 structures to anus; hence they are sometimes called “sea squirts”. ensure ability to
 functions recognise major sub-
 5. The water is filtered through pharangeal gill slits to obtain food (and O2).
 4. The richness of groups or classes and
 marine 6. Larger species are solitary, while smaller colonial species cluster together in a sheet; some even
 defining characteristics
 biodiversity share a central exhalent siphon.
 and 7. Some tunicates remain in the planktonic community rather than becoming benthic. Of particular Incorporate into
 5. Why it must be interest is Appendiculara sp, which sets a “net” of jelly and uses it to trap food. Discarded jelly ecosystem field trips
 conserved nets sink to the bottom and can provide substantial amounts of “nutrient snow” in certain areas.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 131
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

64. Vertebrates: Introduction
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 1 hour Vertebrates comprise all chordates with a vertebral column protecting the dorsal nerve cord and, in most, an
 The depth of this endoskeleton of bone or cartilage. Vertebrates are divided into seven major classes:
 topic is at a level Many
 where pupils 1. Agnatha* YouTube
 2. Chondricthyes Clips are
 appreciate and
 available to
 understand: 3. Osteicthyes*
 illustrate all
 4. Amphibia the defined
 1. Evolutionary 5. Reptilia and
 trends 6. Aves illustrated
 2. The definitive 7. Mammalia. content on
 differences this topic
 *Agnatha and Osteicthyes are actually super-classes: Agnatha, the jawless fish, includes classes Petromyzontida and
 between phyla
 Myxini. Osteicthyes, the bony fish, includes classes Crossopterygii (lobe-finned fish) and Actinopterygii (ray-finned
 3. Specific
 fish). Names are used here for reference only, to illustrate the complexity within the group and highlight taxonomic
 adaptations,
 changes owing to research. Names need not be remembered.
 relating to
 structures to See Shaped
 For each vertebrate class, discuss the following headings. Emphasise comparisons and contrasts in relation to lifestyle
 functions
 and general habitat: for life series
 4. The richness of
 • Definitive differences.
 marine
 • Body covering.
 biodiversity
 • Body plan and external features.
 and
 • General locomotion.
 5. Why it must be
 • Nervous coordination and sense organs.
 conserved
 • Nutrition.
 • Circulation
 • Gaseous exchange surfaces.
 • Excretion and osmoregulation.
 • Temperature regulation.
 • Reproduction.
 • Biology and adaptations of terrestrial classes that have returned to life in the ocean.

132 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

65. Agnatha
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 1 hours -Refer to the Chordate Phylogenetic tree to place this class in its evolutionary context. Photographs, slide Animation video clips
 The Agnatha includes the hagfish, eel-like scavengers found on the sea floor in many cold ocean show and videos on dissections
 The depth of this environments. (Use labelled diagrams to illustrate detail.)
 topic is at a level
 1. This group is sometimes excluded as vertebrates, as they have a cartilage skull and skeletal Study live examples
 where pupils elements, but no vertebrae. (aquarium or rock-
 appreciate and 2. Swim with a frill around the tail. pool study)
 understand: 3. Have eye spots and 3 or 4 pairs of touch and chemical sensitive tentacles around the mouth.
 4. Have very glandular (scale-free) skins capable of secreting large amounts of slime, unpalatable Observation of as
 1. Evolutionary to predators. Exhibit knotting to feed. many live species as
 trends 5. Breathe by taking water through pharyngeal openings into internal gill pouches, which may vent possible, or arrange
 2. The definitive through several pores or a communal tube leading to a single ventral opening. lesson or course with
 differences 6. Have two half-rings of teeth around a horny tongue, with which they fasten onto and tear off nearest aquarium
 between phyla dead flesh.
 3. Specific Use a specific locally
 adaptations, available example,
 relating to but ensure ability to
 structures to recognise major sub-
 functions groups or classes and
 4. The richness of defining
 marine characteristics
 biodiversity
 and Incorporate into
 5. Why it must be ecosystem field trips
 conserved

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 133
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

66. Chondrichthyes
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 5 hours Jawed fish share many common features, including: Photographs,
 1. A generally streamlined body shape to swim with minimal effort. slide show and
 2. Swim using a broad tail and other fins. videos Many YouTube
 The depth of this 3. Breathe by means of gills. (Explain ventilation mechanism.) Clips are available
 4. Are ectothermic, with some exceptions. to illustrate all the
 topic is at a level
 5. Have kidneys to deal with some aspects of excretion. Study live defined and
 where pupils -Refer to the Chordate Phylogenetic tree to place this class in its evolutionary context. examples illustrated content
 appreciate and (Use labelled diagrams to illustrate detail.) (aquarium or on this topic
 understand: 1. Include sharks, skates, rays and chimearas (St Joseph’s shark). All have a cartilage skeleton. rock-pool study)
 2. Chimearas have some characteristics of bony fish, but are cartilaginous.
 1. Evolutionary 3. The rest (Elasmobranchs) share the following: Observation of as
 trends a) Skeleton is entirely cartilage, with limited bone in larger species. Upper jaw is not fused to cranium. many live species
 2. The definitive b) Skin is covered in dermal denticles. as possible, or
 differences c) Locomotion – Fins are not retractable; there are caudal, dorsal (2), anal, paired pectoral, and pelvic. arrange lesson or
 between phyla The fins are designed to provide propulsion, steering and lift. Neutral buoyancy is also maintained course with
 3. Specific through cartilage, large liver with oil, and air gulping. nearest aquarium
 adaptations, d) Nervous coordination – Have very good senses: eyes with pupils and variable tapetum; lateral line;
 relating to nasal pouches or nostrils; Pits of Lorenzini. Use a specific
 structures to e) Nutrition – All are carnivorous, food ranging from plankton to whales. Multiple layers of teeth are locally available
 functions modified to diet. example, but
 4. The richness of f) Compartmentalised through gut with a unique spiral valve in the intestine. ensure ability to
 marine g) Circulation Have a two chambered heart with a single atrium and ventricle, enabling a single recognise major
 biodiversity circulation from the heart, through the gills, to the body and back. sub-groups or
 and h) Gaseous exchange – Gills extract O2 from water, which enters mouth or spiracles and exits through classes and
 5. Why it must be the 5–7 pairs of gill slits. defining
 conserved i) They are ectothermic, losing whatever heat may be generated in the muscles via gills Some sharks characteristics
 generate excess heat in their core and maintain it with counter-current heat exchange (CCHE) capillary
 networks. Incorporate into
 j) Excretion and osmoregulation – Marine fish tend to lose water by osmosis to their surroundings, ecosystem field
 whereas sharks retain urea in blood and tissues, thus increasing cell solutes. Salt is excreted through trips
 gills and a gland into the gut.
 k) Reproduction – Sharks all have internal fertilisation (male claspers); most are ovoviviparous, some
 are oviparous, and a small group is viviparous.

134 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

67. Osteicthyes
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 5 hours -Refer to the Chordate Phylogenetic tree to place this class in its evolutionary context. Photographs, slide
 1. This group typically includes all fish with a skeleton of bone and, generally, fins with bony rays (a show and videos
 The depth of small group; lobe-finned fishes are a separate class). (Use labelled diagrams to illustrate detail).
 2. Most have scales of dermal origin, covered by a thin glandular skin.
 this topic is at a
 3. Most are streamlined and “oval”, but the range of shapes, sizes and colours is very diverse. Study live examples
 level where 4. Locomotion: (aquarium or rock-
 pupils a. They generally swim, but some “walk” along the sea bed. pool study) Fresh or frozen
 appreciate and b. Buoyancy is controlled by a swim bladder (in most). pilchards
 understand: c. Fins all play a role. Typically have caudal fin, single dorsal and anal fins, and paired pectoral Fish dissection
 and pelvic fins.
 1. Evolutionary 5. Nervous coordination: Observation of as
 trends a. A lateral line organ senses vibration, pressure change and sound. many live species as
 2. The b. Inner ear for sound and balance; nostrils sensitive to chemicals. possible, or arrange
 definitive c. Eyes for (colour) vision, no pupillary mechanism or eyelid. lesson or course with
 differences 6. Nutrition: Very wide range of diets (generally carnivore or omnivore, rarely herbivore) and feeding nearest aquarium
 between mechanisms, jaw shapes and arrangements, tooth types; mouth leads to a through gut, egesting
 phyla Use a specific locally
 via cloaca. Urine is added to faeces.
 3. Specific available example,
 7. Circulation Have a two chambered heart with an atrium and ventricle. Enabling a single circulation but ensure ability to
 adaptations,
 from heart, through the gills, to the rest of the body and back. recognise major sub-
 relating to
 8. Gaseous exchange: groups or classes and
 structures to
 a. Breathe through gills. defining
 functions
 b. Water enters mouth, flows over broad vascular surface, and out through single large gill slits characteristics
 4. The richness
 on either side of throat.
 of marine
 c. Variety of ventilation mechanisms. Incorporate into
 biodiversity
 9. Excretion: ecosystem field trips
 and
 a. Excretion occurs through kidneys and gills.
 5. Why it must
 b. Marine fish lose water to their surroundings, so they drink a lot and excrete salts.
 be
 c. Freshwater fish absorb water and produce much diluted urine.
 conserved
 10. Most are ectothermic, some very sensitive to temperature change, but exceptions exist (similar to
 sharks).
 11. Reproduction:
 a. Mainly oviparous, with mass spawning being common.
 b. Some lay eggs in “nests” and a few have brood pouches.
 c. Many species are hermaphroditic and some exhibit sex change at a certain life stage.
 12. Bioluminescence: Several fish (and other animals) that live in dark or low-light conditions emit a
 form of light, which may be permanent or can be switched on and off. Pockets of cells

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 135
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 (photophores) contain bioluminescent chemicals (switchable) or symbiotic luminous bacteria
 (maskable).

136 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

68. Terrestrial Vertebrate Classes and Returning to the Sea
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 2 hours Terrestrial Revise life patterns, classification and the animal phyla already covered. Photographs, Recognise types
 vertebrate -Refer to the Chordate Phylogenetic tree to place these classes in their evolutionary context. slide show and from diagrams
 timeline 1. These classes are most likely to have evolved from lobe-finned fish or ancestors similar to videos and photos
 mudskippers.
 The depth of this 2. The change was possibly driven by a move to feed on land-living invertebrates or lay eggs where they Study live
 were safe from predators. examples
 topic is at a level
 3. The fossil record shows: Diagram or photo
 where pupils a. Amphibians appeared first, about 330 million years ago (mya), giving rise to amniotes (animals Observation of of local animals
 appreciate and that produce amniotic eggs) about 310 mya. as many live to show
 understand: b. Reptiles and early mammals appeared around 300 mya, with reptiles becoming dominant (as species as definitive
 dinosaurs) from 250 mya until 65 mya (also several examples of marine dinosaurs). possible, or features
 1. Evolutionary c. True birds evolved from reptiles from about 140 mya onward. arrange lesson
 trends d. Dinosaurs suffered mass extinction around 65 mya, after which birds and mammals radiated to fill or course with
 2. The definitive empty niches, some becoming marine creatures. nearest
 differences museum
 between phyla The amphibians represent the first group of vertebrates that can be regarded as terrestrial. There are now no
 3. Specific marine amphibians, with the only known exception of one frog (the crab-eating frog) that can enter sea water Internet and
 adaptations, after a few days of acclimatising. Amphibians have: YouTube
 relating to 1. Soft, thin glandular skin.
 structures to 2. Head and trunk, sometimes a tail, and four distinct limbs with digits.
 functions 3. Large eyes that enable good eyesight. Reasonable sense of smell. Ear drum on head leads to middle
 4. The richness of and inner ear – they have good hearing and balance.
 marine 4. They are carnivores using sight and smell to find food. Simple teeth are outgrowths of the jaw.
 biodiversity 5. They breathe by means of rudimentary lungs, the lining of the mouth (buccal cavity) and skin.
 and 6. The breathing surfaces are thin, moist, often folded, and well supplied with blood vessels. Tadpoles
 5. Why it must be and some adults have external and/or internal gills.
 conserved 7. Reproduction retains its marine roots: external fertilisation and soft yolk-filled eggs, normally laid in
 indicator water.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 137
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 Returning to Sea Inevitably, as vertebrates became adapted to terrestrial niches,
 1. Competition may have forced some to forage from coastlines and, eventually, return to the sea.
 2. To hunt successfully, these animals needed to be able to –
 a) Dive to some depth
 b) Stay underwater long enough to find food.
 8. Several limiting factors would have to be dealt with by critical adaptations:
 The depth of this a) Locomotion – Need to swim again.
 topic is at a level b) Oxygen – Oxygen needs to be carried along and used very efficiently.
 where pupils c) Osmoregulation – A diet of seafood and salt water requires the excretion of excess salt.
 appreciate and d) Temperature – As depth increases, temperatures drop to close to freezing point.
 understand: e) Pressure – Diving to great depths calls for as few internal air spaces as possible, or an
 exoskeleton.
 1. Evolutionary f) Avoiding the bends – A build-up of nitrogen in the blood can lead to bubbles forming as
 trends pressure decreases. This is called “the bends” and needs to be dealt with or avoided.
 2. The definitive g) Reproduction – Unless this occurs on land (often still the case) special measures are called for.
 differences
 between phyla
 3. Specific
 adaptations,
 relating to
 structures to
 functions
 4. The richness of
 marine
 biodiversity
 and
 5. Why it must be
 conserved
 .

138 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

69. Marine Reptiles
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 3 hours Reptilian characteristics and Marine reptiles Photographs and Many
 -Refer to the Chordate Phylogenetic tree to place this class in its evolutionary context. illustrations of YouTube
 The depth of Reptiles were the first vertebrate group to successfully conquer dry land. marine reptiles Clips are
 1. Waterproof skin with epidermal scales enables them to survive very dry conditions. available to
 this topic is at
 2. They have a head, trunk, tail, and four limbs with digits, generally under the body. illustrate all
 a level where 3. Have good eyesight and a reasonable sense of smell. Ear drum recessed in head leads to middle and inner ear – they have the defined
 pupils good hearing and balance. Local marine and
 appreciate and 4. Homodontic teeth grow from sockets. Food is chewed and processed by a compartmentalised through gut. reptiles to be illustrated
 understand: identified in content on
 5. Circulation – Most reptiles have three chambered heart with two atria and a single partially divided ventricle. Oxygenated
 this topic
 blood from the lungs enters one of the atria and can be selectively distributed to critical parts of the body by the ventricle. practical lessons
 1. Evolutionary
 6. They breathe by means of spongy lungs. Inner surfaces are thin, moist, often folded and well supplied with blood vessels. or exams
 trends
 2. The 7. Mostly ectothermic.
 definitive 8. Have internal fertilisation and produce amniotic eggs. Eggs have large yolk, amnion and a leathery or calcareous water-
 differences proof shell. Some species are ovoviviparous.
 between
 phyla In the Mesozoic period, many reptiles had returned to the ocean, with an even greater variety than sea mammals today. The
 3. Specific
 Ichthyosaurus closely resembled modern dolphins.
 adaptations,
 relating to 1. Certain marine crocodiles spend some time on land and lay their eggs there.
 structures 2. Sea snakes are almost entirely aquatic, with flattened bodies and tails, salt glands in their mouths, skin flaps over their
 to functions nostrils, and large lungs; they may even give birth to live young.
 4. The richness 3. The most prominent and locally relevant marine reptile is the turtle.
 of marine 4. Of the seven species of turtle, the Leatherback and Loggerhead nest on our shores, and the green turtle and hawksbill are
 biodiversity
 frequent visitors.
 and
 Turtle adaptations to marine life:
 5. Why it must
 be 1. The carapace (shell) is flattened and streamlined.
 conserved 2. Limbs have evolved into flippers.
 3. Fat deposits and lightened bones aid buoyancy and temperature conservation.
 4. Large lungs enable turtles to hold their breath for long periods: if active, about 40 min; when sleeping, for many hours;
 when hibernating, for some weeks.
 5. Heart rate slows radically. Non-vital organs are shut off and vital organs make do with less (diving bradycardia).
 6. Large number of red blood cells contain high concentrations of haemoglobin.
 7. Muscles have myoglobin.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 139
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 8. Ectothermic metabolism has a relatively small O2 demand, and hibernating metabolism can be radically lowered.
 9. Turtles have strong, sometimes serrated beaks to eat a range of food (sea plants, many invertebrates, fish and jellies).
 10. Specialised salt glands in the nasal passages excrete excess salt.
 11. Reproduction –
 a) Mature turtles mate at sea.
 b) Females can store the sperm for several years.
 c) They return to the beaches on which they were born…
 d) To lay eggs in several batches over many weeks.
 e) Egg incubation takes a few weeks.
 f) The sex of babies is dictated by temperature during incubation.
 g) Hatchlings emerge at night to crawl back to the sea.
 h) Infant mortality rates are huge.
 12. Turtles are all endangered species, some of them critically.

140 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

70. Marine Birds
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 3 hours -Refer to the Chordate Phylogenetic tree to place this class in its evolutionary context. Sea bird identification Many YouTube Clips are
 This group built on the successes of the reptile revolution and took to the air. Birds have: available to illustrate all
 The depth of this 1. Waterproof skin with epidermal scales and feathers. Photographs and the defined and
 2. Head, trunk and tail. Rear limbs (legs) with digits; forelimbs modified to form wings. illustrations of marine illustrated content on this
 topic is at a level
 3. Endothermic ability. birds topic
 where pupils
 appreciate and 4. Good eyesight and a poor sense of smell. Ear drum recessed in head leads to middle and inner
 Local marine birds to be
 understand: ear; excellent hearing and balance.
 identified in practicals or
 5. Beaks – huge variety of beak shapes to enable food sources to be utilised. No teeth.
 exam
 1. Evolutionary 6. Circulation –Have a four chambered heart with two atria and two ventricles enabling a double
 trends circulation; Pulmonary circulation to the lungs and back and Systemic circulation to the body.
 2. The definitive 7. Tube-filled lungs leading to air sacs for breathing. The tubes are vascular and enable constant
 differences ventilation.
 between phyla
 8. Reproduction by means of internally fertilised eggs, which have large yolk, amnion and a
 3. Specific
 adaptations, calcareous waterproof shell. Hatchlings can be altricial or precocial, depending on the lifestyle of
 relating to the species.
 structures to
 functions Penguins
 4. The richness of (Provide labelled photos and diagrams to show penguin structures and variety.)
 marine Many birds inhabit and nest along the coastlines of oceans and inland waters, and rely on aquatic
 biodiversity organisms as their source of food. Some fly out and dive for it, floating on the water surface to rest or
 and gliding on air currents above the waves, often for days. Other species forage on shores, and some swim.
 5. Why it must be 1. For all bird species, it is ideal to have oily, waterproof feathers (and preen glands). Air can be
 conserved trapped between the feathers and keep body warmth insulated.
 2. While the adaptations of birds that fly out to sea and dive for their food are remarkable, the
 penguin truly captures our attention as marine-adapted birds. The African penguin is endemic to
 the South African and Namibian coastline.
 3. Penguins nest and roost on land but spend a lot of their time foraging in the water.
 4. Their bodies are hydrodynamic.
 5. Their wings are adapted to “fly” underwater.
 6. Barbed tongues enable the swallowing of fish.
 7. Salt glands deal with salt excretion.
 8. Waterproof feathers trap air to keep the bird warm and dry; penguins also carry fat reserves.
 9. Blood flow can be cut off to non-essential organs, and muscles can operate anaerobically (diving
 bradycardia

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 141
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

71. Marine Mammals
 Term 1 Strand – Marine Biology

 Time Depth Key Concept Investigations Resources
 3 hours Mammals were a suitable group to take over the reign of the dinosaurs, in whose shadow they had survived for eons. Photographs, slide show, Many YouTube Clips
 Land mammals have: videos and diagrams to are available to
 The depth of this 1. Waterproof skin with hair or fur (with a few exceptions). illustrate variety illustrate all the
 defined and
 topic is at a level 2. Four limbs with digits, generally under the body and similar in size.
 Study live examples illustrated content
 where pupils 3. Good eyesight and sense of smell. Pinna directs sound to ear drum which is recessed in head, leading to on this topic
 appreciate and middle and inner ear. Good hearing and balance. Observation of as many
 understand: 4. Generally, heterodontic teeth growing in sockets, with teeth adapted to type of diet. live species as possible,
 5. Circulation- A four chambered heart, as in the birds, provides for an effective double circulation. or arrange lesson or
 1. Evolutionary 6. Large spongy lungs for breathing. Diaphragm isolates thoracic cavity and aids breathing mechanism. course with nearest
 trends 7. Separate digestive and urinogenital openings – all other vertebrates have a cloaca. museum or zoo
 2. The definitive
 8. Endothermic ability.
 differences Use a specific locally
 between phyla 9. Viviparous reproduction and internal fertilisation; embryo develops in uterus and is nurtured via a placenta available example, but
 3. Specific (except monotremes, and marsupials to a limited extent). ensure ability to
 adaptations, 10. Offspring are fed milk from mammary glands, once they are born. recognise major sub-
 relating to groups or classes and
 structures to (Use labelled photos and diagrams to illustrate variety and characteristics.) defining characteristics
 functions
 As with reptiles, many mammals have returned to the sea. Marine mammals include whales, dolphins, porpoises,
 4. The richness of Incorporate into
 seals, sea-lions, walruses, otters, dugongs, manatees, platypuses and polar bears. An excellent fossil record shows the
 marine ecosystem field trips
 biodiversity evolution of whales from bear-like ancestors. Marine mammals may be partially aquatic (platypus and otter find food
 and in water), highly aquatic (seals use land only to bask and breed), or entirely aquatic (manatees, dolphins and whales
 5. Why it must be live and reproduce in the water).
 conserved 1. Prominent marine mammals include the Pinnipeds (seals and sea lions or fur seals). The Cape Fur Seal is endemic
 to the South African and Namibian shoreline.
 a) They have dog-like heads, and limbs that are modified to act as flippers.
 b) Sea lions have limbs suited to moving around on land and swimming, and small pinnae.
 c) Waterproof fur traps air and thick blubber layers are common.
 d) A counter-current blood network is common.
 e) Fur seals mate and breed on land, normally forming large colonies, where the young are birthed and
 then tended for by the female. She has to leave the pup on the breeding beach in order to forage for

142 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 food. The mothers can recognise the call of their pups in order to find them again. The pups are more
 vulnerable to predators when the mothers are away.
2. Cetaceans: whales and dolphins. Whales common to our shoreline include the Southern Right, Humpback and
 Brydes’. Dolphins seen on our shoreline include the Common, Bottlenose, Dusky, Humpback and Heavisides
 (endemic to the West Coast of SA). Killer whales are occasionally spotted and are also considered to be dolphins.
 Cetaceans have the following features:
 a. Bodies are hydrodynamic and limbs are modified to form flippers or flukes.
 b. The rear limb bones are totally reduced, and tail flukes of connective tissue have evolved.
 c. Food can be caught using echolocation and (homodontic) teeth (Odontoceti).
 d. Others filter food out of plankton-rich waters using baleen plates (Mysteceti).
 e. Kidneys are capable of excreting high concentrations to deal with high salt intake.
 f. Nostrils are on top of the head (blow hole).
 g. Replacement of lung air is rapid and each breath replaces almost all lung volume.
 h. Lungs collapse as diving commences, to reduce bends and buoyancy.
 i. Recent research shows that very high levels of red blood cells and myoglobin retain O2.
 j. Thick fat layers (blubber) conserve temperature.
 k. Non-vital organs are shut off and vital ones make do with less; heart rate slows radically (bradycardia).
 Dives to 1000+ m have been recorded.
 l. Mating and birthing take place at sea. In the case of the Southern right whale, the whales migrate to the
 south coast of South Africa, in the winter months, to give birth to their calves and mate. They will have
 thick layers of blubber from which they can source milk for the rapidly growing calves. As summer
 approaches, the mother and calf migrate to the plankton rich waters of the Southern Ocean, where they
 can feed and replenish their blubber layers.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 143
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

72. Kelp Forests
 Term 2 Strand – Ecology
 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours Individual The entire West Coast of Southern Africa is dominated by Kelp Forest habitats. Kelps – Videos
 ecosystems 1. Require rock surfaces to grow on.
 should be 2. Grow from the infratidal zone to as far as 3 km away from the shore, wherever reefs are shallower than 30 m. Kelp forest
 viewed with
 3. Form the ocean equivalent of a tropical forest.
 reference to
 the ecological 4. Encounter frequent heavy wave action. Ecology
 concepts 5. Also encounter south to easterly gales, mainly in summer, which cause upwelling. lesson at The
 introduced in 6. Thrive in water that is nutrient-rich (see “Upwelling” in Oceanography section). Two Oceans
 Gr10 and The dense growth of kelp and other algae forms three distinct zones: Aquarium
 highlight the 1. Inshore zone
 unique a. Here smaller sea bamboo (Ecklonia maxima) and large amounts of benthic algae are found.
 components
 b. Relatively few animals occur here.
 and
 interactions 2. Intermediate zone
 within each. a. Water depths are less than 15 m.
 b. Dense stands of Ecklonia with split fan kelp (Laminaria pallida) form an understorey, along with algae that is
 Understanding mainly red, benthic and epiphytic.
 of the c. Relatively few animals are found here; the few that do occur are mainly filter feeders.
 complexity of d. This is a stable system, much like tropical forests, where new colonisation only occurs after older plants are
 ecosystems is uprooted or die.
 critical for 3. The offshore zone
 learning about a. Can be seen as mainly island-like stands of Laminaria, with similar low animal numbers and abundance in the two
 the multi previous zones.
 disciplinarily b. but with a far greater abundance of animals on the open reef between these stands.
 of Marine Kelp forests are amongst the most productive environments. Many
 YouTube
 Sciences. 1. Kelp fronds grow continuously and their ends fray and break off.
 Clips are
 Class 2. Growth is rapid, especially in summer. available
 discussions, 3. Storm surf uproots some kelp and other algae, which then decompose on beaches and are returned to the sea as to
 field trips and organic nutrients and microscopic fragments. illustrate
 projects 4. Kelps produce large amounts of mucus that prevents damage as the fronds rub against each other. all the
 should be 5. This mucus is rich in organic compounds which, when released into the water by strong wave action, form a thick defined
 surface foam. and
 used to
 illustrated
 integrate 6. The foam promotes significant bacterial growth.
 content
 ecosystem 7. Thus, instead of the fresh plant matter, which is quite indigestible, far more food is made available as weathered on this
 detritus, organic compounds and large amounts of bacteria. topic
144 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

studies and 8. After an upwelling event (which stops when the wind subsides), phytoplankton blooms can occur.
other Feeding interactions:
appropriate 1. Kelp particles, decomposition bacteria and phytoplankton blooms are capitalised on by filter feeders, including mussels,
topics in this sponges, red bait, sea cucumbers and feather stars.
curriculum. 2. Kelp holdfasts provide a haven for a high diversity of small invertebrates.
 3. Kelps also reduce the effect of wave action, providing calm environments in which animals can survive.
 4. Some herbivores eat fragmented kelp fronds, including urchins, alikreukel (Turbo sp) and abalone (Haliotus midae).
 5. Few herbivores graze on living kelp, with the exception of the kelp limpet (Cymbula compressa). It is adapted to hold
 onto the kelp stipe, and aggressively defends it from other herbivores.
 6. Carnivores and omnivores in turn feed on the herbivores; these include lobsters, octopi, Reef sharks, many species of
 fish, seals and penguins.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 145
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

73. Waves: Energy transfer
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
4 hours An overview is How do waves begin? Illustrate with a
 adequate to 1. A wave is formed by wind contact and friction on the surface of the water. This disturbance of the water’s miniature wave tank
 provide a basis for surface tension sets in motion the formation of a wave. Waves start as capillary waves (or ripples); these grow
 learners to in size to become gravity waves.
 understand the 2. The anatomy of a wave: the elevated part is the crest, the depressed part is the trough. The wavelength is the
 context of oceans distance between two crests or two troughs. Water particles move in orbits as the wave moves forward.
 waves as part of 3. Waves in motion: wave height increases with wind speed, wind duration and the fetch. The fetch is the
 the locality of continuous area of water over which the wind blows in a consistent direction.
 Marine Sciences 4. The energy of the wave is related to the wave height.
 studies and 5. Shallow-water waves occur when water depth that the wave is moving into is 5% of the wave length. The
 research. speed of shallow waves becomes slower than in deep water, and the wave height increases (wavelength = v/f).
 6. Waves arriving at the coastline can be refracted, reflected and diffracted. Refraction is the change of direction
 or the bending of waves. Reflection is the rebounding of the wave after striking a surface. Diffraction is the
 bending of waves between or around obstacles.
 7. A wave approaching the shore will break when friction on the sea bed slows the base of the wave to such an
 extent that the top overtakes the bottom. The force with which the wave breaks depends on the profile of the
 sea bed. A shallow gradient mean a slow spilling wave, and a steep gradient means a fast plunging wave.
 8. At the shore’s surf zone, breaking waves move water to the shore. Breaking waves are called spillers or
 plungers. Water moves toward the shore and then away in the form of rip currents, or along the shore as
 longshore drift.
 Tsunami or Seismic Waves
 1. A tsunami is a wave with an extremely long wavelength produced by submarine seismic activity, such as an
 earthquake or sudden movement of the earth’s crust.
 2. Directly above the seismic event, the whole column of water moves up and down. This triggers the long-
 wavelength wave.
 3. Tsunamis can travel across an ocean for thousands of kilometres.
 4. In deep water, tsunamis typically travel without being noticed. As the wave enters shallower water, the
 amplitude of the of wave increases.
 5. Tsunami waves behave like massive shallow-water waves, becoming very forceful.
 6. Tidal waves (tidal bores) are not to be confused with tsunami waves. Tidal waves form in a narrow inlet or Many YouTube Clips are
 river mouth where there is a large tidal range. In the Yellow River, given the correct conditions, waves can last available to illustrate all the
 up to 11 km upstream. defined and illustrated
 content on this topic

146 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

74. Chemical Composition of Sea Water
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography
 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 4 hours Basic Marine Basic Marine Sciences Chemistry Many YouTube
 Sciences Revise Polar Bonding; Covalent Bonds; Hydrogen Bonding Clips are
 Chemistry Ionic Bonding available to
 1. Water is an excellent solvent. Water’s dissolving ability is a result of the polar nature of the water molecule. illustrate all
 Revise Polar 2. Sodium chloride (Na+Cl-l) is the most common salt, and is made up of sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl-) ions. the defined
 Bonding; 3. An ion is an atom or group of atoms that has an unbalanced charge, owing to the atom losing or gaining an and illustrated
 Covalent electron. content on this
 Bonds; 4. In water a covalent bond exists, which is an equal sharing of electrons. topic
 Hydrogen 5. In Na+Cl-l the sodium has lost electrons and the chloride gained electrons. Salt therefore has a latticed crystal
 Bonding. structure.
 Ionic Bonding 6. In salt, the sodium and chlorine ions are linked by the mutual attraction of their opposite electrical charges. The
 is done in Gr ions in sodium and chloride in Na+Cl-l are held together by ionic bonds.
 12 7. Ionic bonds are electrostatic attractions that exist between ions that have opposite charges.
 8. When Na+Cl-l dissolves in water, the ionic bonds in Na+ and Cl-l are weakened by the polarity of water. This results
 in the ions separating; as they move away from each other the water has contact with the next layer of Na +Cl-l.
 9. Oil does not dissolve in water even when shaken vigorously. This is due to the oil molecule being non-polar in
 character. The oil molecule has neither a positive nor a negative charge to attract the polar water molecule. In
 living tissues this is an advantage because water does not dissolve the oils within tissue membranes.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 147
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

75. Ekman Spiral and Eddies
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
4 hours Ekman Spiral Ekman Spiral and Ekman Transport NOAA
 1. Wind-driven surface water “drags” underlying water with it.
 2. As a result of friction, the deeper layer of water moves more slowly than the surface layer of the water Video on
 and is deflected more by the Coriolis Effect. thermohaline
 3. Each successive layer below follows a similar pattern: each deeper layer moves more slowly, and with a circulation
 greater angle of deflection, than the layer above it.
 4. At about 100 m to 150m below the surface, currents move in exactly the opposite direction to that on the
 surface.
 5. This current spiral in the water column is known as the Ekman spiral and Ekman transport.
 6. The Coriolis Effect deflects to the left in the southern hemisphere and to the right in the northern
 hemisphere.
 Currents
 1. All patterns of flowing ocean water are called currents.
 2. Large current systems are mostly named after the area where they exist (eg Agulhas Current).
 3. Downwelling occurs, at times, in areas where two opposing surface currents converge.
 4. Upwelling occurs on the western sides of continents in the region of the Trade Winds (eg SE wind off west
 coast of South Africa, also west of California, Peru and Australia).
 Global Circulation
 In addition to wind-driven surface circulation (explained above), a slow planetary circulation of water
 occurs through currents that mix water from the Indian Ocean and the Atlantic Ocean basins. This
 movement distributes heat in the ocean basins. The Indian Ocean water is driven southward in the
 Agulhas Current, then partly northwards as eddies flowing north-west from the southern tip of Africa, then
 driven northwards by the Benguela Current. This water joins the Gulf Stream and ends up in Arctic waters.
 In the Arctic, cold dense water with high salinity sinks and flows as a deep counter-current southwards in
 the Atlantic, then from the Antarctic Shelf in a north-easterly direction toward India. The water rises to the
 surface and begins its journey back to the North Atlantic. Water freezes at the poles in winter. As this
 occurs cold salt water or brine sinks to the ocean floor and forms a deep thermohaline current.
 Eddies
 1. Narrow fast-moving currents move into the open sea, displacing the water through which they move.
 2. The current oscillates, meanders and develops waves along its boundary. These pinch off as pockets of
 spiralling water called eddies.

148 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

76. Scientific Inquiry
 Terms 2 Strand – Humans and the Ocean

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 9 hours The Scientific This section provides the basis for the students to develop a Marine Sciences project that demonstrates their skills in applying Observation Hypothesis A range of
 Method the Marine Sciences curriculum. As scientists-to-be, students need to practise observing, inquiring, investigating, and testing Theory and truth equipment can
 researching the natural world. It is here that Marine Sciences as a curriculum subject comes into its own. The oceans are filled be used for this
 In Grade 12 with beauty, fascinating elements and intriguing occurrences. The Marine Sciences project is the opportunity for a teacher to Problem statement (initial practical work;
 engender passion for the oceans among Marine Sciences students. inquiry) for example,
 Teachers and The Scientific Method transects,
 Hypothesis (allows for
 learners need 1. Conducting an investigation – one conducts an investigation by collecting evidence from a variety of sources, developing Secchi disks,
 predictions)
 to deal with a an explanation based on the data, and communicating and defending one’s conclusions. and water
 thorough 2. Method – the scientific method requires questions leading to a hypothesis that can tested by observations, in turn Experimental design sampling
 understanding leading to conclusions. (materials and procedure) equipment
 of the 3. A theory is proposed on the basis of evidence obtained from research conducted.
 representing Science Process Skills Data collection (observations
 data in and measurements)
 1. Observe – use all the senses.
 different 2. Question and hypothesise – a hypothesis is a tentative explanation about possible causes or dynamics of a phenomenon. Analysis and interpretation
 formats (eg. 3. Predict – scientific predictions are based on observations, measurements, and relationships between observed variables. of data or results
 Tables and 4. Use the right terminology – all procedures and reporting are vitally dependent on the precise use of terms. (inferences)
 Graphs and
 5. Define variables – identify and distinguish variables that are controlled (held constant) and those which are manipulated. Drawing conclusions
 analysing the
 a. Independent (manipulated) variable – the measurement or condition that is regulated by the person doing the (answering the research
 data to come
 experiment. question or problem)
 to conclusions
 b. Dependent (responding) variable – what you measure and observe in response to changes in the independent
 regarding the Have we proved or
 variable.
 hypothesis. disproved the hypothesis?
 c. Controlled (fixed) variable – these refer to conditions that must be kept the same (held constant) in order to
 .
 isolate the result; a controlled variable has the potential to vary but is deliberately restricted. Extension (further inquiry –
 6. Perform experiment. pose new questions that are
 7. Record results. related to the original
 8. Analyse results. question and can lead to
 9. Draw conclusions. new investigations)
 10. Produce a research report and poster – the report should include Introduction, Hypothesis, Method, Results, Discussion,
 Conclusion.
 Research Skills
 11. Classify – group related objects and ideas together.
 12. Quantify – use numbers and measurements related to time, length, width, volume and ratio.
 13. Communicate results – describe verbally (text) or visually in tables and graphs.
 14. Interpret, discuss data and draw conclusions – explain an observation.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 149
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

77. South African Shoreline
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours An overview The South African coastline stretches for over 2500 km. South African Extracts from Shoreline
 of this topic 1. Semi-desert conditions are experienced on the north-western coastline as there is little precipitation in this examples series (SABC)
 adequately area. Coastal fog is common.
 informs the A high sediment load is deposited into the ocean by the Orange River. Research shows that over millennia, the
 learner of the mouth of the Orange River has meandered between Lamberts Bay and Lüderitz. Diamond dredge mining
 South African dominates the economy of this coastline.
 Coastal setting The Namaqualand area is famous for its flowers in August and widespread succulent Karoo vegetation.
 in which South 2. The SW Cape from Lamberts Bay to Mossel Bay experiences a Mediterranean climate. This coastline includes
 African significant estuaries at the mouths of the Olifants berg and Breede Rivers. The coastline is typically broad coastal
 Marine plains with sandy and rocky shores.
 Sciences 3. Exceptions include the Gordon’s Bay, Rooiels and Chapmans Peak shorelines, in which sheer cliffs plunge
 research is straight into the sea.
 undertaken. 4. The coastline adjacent to Agulhas Bank has long stretch of high limestone cliffs with wave-cut platforms
 5. Southern Cape has a higher rainfall, with an associated evergreen Afromontane forest. There are examples of
 coastlines of submergence and emergence between Wilderness and Plettenberg Bay giving rise to significant
 lakes, wetlands and estuaries (the Knysna estuary being of special significance). The emergent coastline between
 Natures Valley and Storms River mouth has steep sandstone cliffs incised by river valleys. The valley slopes have
 a north–south aspect, giving rise to markedly different vegetation types on either side of the valley.
 6. The Eastern Cape and southern Kwa-Zulu Natal (KZN) coastlines are characterised by barrier dunes, covered by
 dense subtropical thicket and bisected by numerous estuaries that provide breeding grounds for fish species.
 The “Hole in the Wall” is an example of a geological feature (arch) and is found at Coffee Bay in Eastern Cape.
 7. For approximately 17 km north of Richards Bay, in a 2-km wide strip, heavy sands such as titanium, rutile, zircon
 and pig iron are mined.
 8. Central KZN to northern KZN is characterised by mangrove swamps, and coral reefs are found in these
 subtropical coastal waters.
 9. There is higher precipitation along South Africa’s east coast compared with the west coast. A larger number of
 rivers drain the eastern part of the country, resulting in associated estuaries at the East Coast river mouths.
 Define:
 a) Dunes
 b) Beach composition and anatomy of a beach
 c) Erosional forces
 d) Coastal movement

150 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

78. Coastal Formations
 Term 2 Strand – Oceanography

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours An overview 1. The coast is the land area along or near the ocean that is shaped and influenced by the sea.
 of this topic 2. A primary coastline is shaped by tectonic forces on continental margins, and is acted upon by secondary forces
 adequately such as waves, currents and wind action.
 informs the 3. The shore is the area from the low tide mark to the top of the wave zone.
 learner of the 4. Beaches are areas where sediment is deposited and accumulates. The beach is a dynamic balance between
 South African deposition and erosion of material.
 Coastal setting 5. A beach is either an erosional or depositional beach.
 in which South 6. A beach which loses the same amount of material as the amount deposited is a beach in equilibrium.
 African 7. Features of a beach are:
 Marine a) offshore trough
 Sciences b) bar
 research is c) low tide terrace
 undertaken. d) wave platform
 e) beach
 f) scarp
 g) berm
 8. Beaches are described by the shape, size, colour and composition of the beach material.
 9. Floating plastic and other marine debris tends to accumulate on depositional beaches. Floating debris is
 brought there by the movement of currents and wave action.
 10. In the surf zone, breaking waves produce a current that moves sediment along the shore (longshore current).
 This is called longshore transport. Use an example of a
 11. Rip currents move sediment seaward through the surf zone. simple wave tank to Shoreline video plus
 12. Estuaries are river mouths, and their associated banks and beds are subject to the tidal ebb and flow of the sea illustrate the a range of YouTube
 water they discharge into. sediment load and clips on the subject.
 13. Estuaries play an important role in providing nursery habitats for juvenile fish. Estuaries are excellent sites to movement on a small
 study salinity and other water quality parameters. scale model

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 151
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

79. Climate Change
 Term 2 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 2 hours The depth at 1. Weather is the condition of the atmosphere at a particular place and time, in terms of temperature, sunshine http://www.physicalgeography.net
 which this topic (daylight hours), cloud cover, wind, rain, air pressure, and moisture or humidity. /fundamentals/7v.html
 should be 2. Climate is an average weather condition in a locality over a relatively long period of time, at least 30 years.
 understood is
 3. Types of climate are defined within the Köppen’s climate classification system. Levels of precipitation and
 one in which
 learners should vegetation types are the criteria used to distinguish between each climate type.
 apply their 4. A change of a climate type would be from one Köppen type to another.
 knowledge of 5. Increased CO2 emissions from burning fossil fuels have released CO2 into the atmosphere. Currently the rate of CO2
 other topics emission is 10 times faster than it has been at any other time in the past 66 million years. Other human activities
 studied up to this have added further to the greenhouse gas emissions.
 point. In addition 6. Greenhouse gasses have changed the average temperature of the planet, over the past 20 to 40 years, at
 this topic will
 unprecedented levels. Subsequent effects include melting of ice caps, increasingly severe hurricanes, and flooding
 form as a frame
 of reference as and drought.
 further topics in 7. With the shift to dryer climates, there is likely to be a significant change in agriculture. In some areas agricultural
 the Ecology and activity is likely to collapse as a result of drought conditions.
 Humans and the 8. An increase in average temperatures on earth can result in melting ice caps, with a significant sea level rise; this
 Ocean strands affects the coasts and low-lying coastal ecosystems as well as the infrastructure.
 are introduced. 9. Properties and human infrastructural development at the sea shore (adjacent to the high-tide mark) are vulnerable
 The topic lends
 to flooding because of higher sea levels and associated storm surges.
 itself to higher
 level solutions 10. Greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced by management plans and by changing to environmentally friendly
 based lifestyles.
 applications

152 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

80. Ocean Acidification
 Term 2 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 1 hours The depth at Conduct an Materials:
 which this topic 1. The chemistry of the ocean is linked to the chemistry of the earth’s atmosphere. investigation as tank, water,
 should be 2. Ocean acidification is caused by CO₂ emissions into the atmosphere. Most CO₂ in the atmosphere comes illustrated in indicator, “earth
 understood is https://www.yout platform” and
 from burning fossil fuels.
 one in which ube.com/watch?v dry ice
 learners should 3. An increased amount of CO2 in the ocean results in increased acidity of the ocean. =a_CS0-FXfmA
 apply their a. Any solution in contact with a gas in its surrounding environment will result in chemical equilibrium with that https://www.yout
 knowledge of environment. If disequilibrium is established, a new equilibrium will occur. ube.com
 other topics b. The average pH of sea water is 8.1. /watch?v=kxPwbh
 studied up to this c. CO2 added to water forms increased quantities of carbonic acid: H2O + CO2 →H2CO₃. FeZSw
 point. In addition 4. Extra CO2 in the atmosphere is absorbed by the ocean to create equilibrium. The CO2 combines with water to
 this topic will http://www.unep
 form carbonic acid, which breaks down into bicarbonate molecules and hydrogen ions.
 form as a frame .org
 of reference as 5. Carbonate combines more easily with hydrogen ions, which could lead to some marine animals being unable /dewa/Portals/67
 further topics in to form protective shells. Calcium and carbonate cannot bind together in a more acidic environment; this /pdf/
 the Ecology and specifically affects the shells of molluscs, carapaces of rock lobsters, and tests of urchins and all other marine Ocean_Acidificati
 Humans and the organisms with structures formed from calcium carbonate. on.pdf
 Ocean strands 6. A decrease in the ocean’s pH (increase of the acidity) thus has a hugely detrimental impact on marine
 are introduced. organisms.
 The topic lends
 itself to higher
 level solutions
 based
 applications

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 153
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

81. El Niño
 Term 3 Strand – Oceanography
 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 3 hours The El Nino El Niño Explore simple http://www.unocha.org/
 phenomenon In a previous section, the “normal” atmospheric conditions experienced in the Pacific region are described. Under weather models legacy/el-nino-
 had a certain circumstances these conditions change to an El Niño or La Niña event. which explain the El southern-africa
 profound During some years, warm tropical water moves eastward across the Pacific, accumulating along the west coast of Nino and La Nina
 effect upon South America. This blocks the normal upwelling and is called El Niño, associated with changes in air pressure and phenomena
 South wind direction.
 African
 2. The trade winds of the Pacific typically blow in a SE direction each summer.
 weather and
 conditions (This is similar to the SE wind that occurs in Western Cape.)
 that impact 3. On the western side of tropical landmasses (eg along the coast of Peru and Ecuador), the water is normally
 upon a South cold and highly productive with living organisms (because of upwelling).
 African every 4. At times the trade winds lose their driving force; upwelling becomes less, and warm surface water
 day life. This accumulates along the coast.
 includes
 5. This kills off cold water species, upsetting the food chain.
 drought and
 sardine 6. In severe cases this can result in increased levels of hydrogen sulphide in the water.
 movements 7. During some years the water remains warmer for the full year (eg 1982–1983, it was 7°C above normal
 along the temperature levels).
 coast. 8. This could be caused by a change in air pressure on either side of the Pacific disturbing the trade winds.
 Higher level 9. The above phenomenon is named El Niño – after the Christ child, as it has mostly occurred over the Christmas
 debates, period in December.
 discussions
 10. This phenomenon also has an effect on South African weather conditions, with the effect varying depending
 and
 applications on the strength and phase of the event.
 should be La Niña (Spanish for “the girl”)
 included in 1. This name is given to periods when the surface temperature of Pacific water is lower than normal. This drop
 class intensifies the “normal” drier conditions over coastal regions of Peru and Chile.
 discussions 2. Flooding increases in India, Burma and Thailand.
 and 3. There has been no significant occurrence of La Niña since 1975; hence, data has not been placed in
 assessment sophisticated computer models to accurately predict an occurrence of La Niña.
 tasks.

154 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

82. Aquaculture of Marine Species
 Term 3 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 4 hours The depth at 1. Marine aquaculture refers to the breeding and growing of marine organisms such as fish, molluscs, Visit an Aquarium http://www.fao.org/fishery/
 which this crustaceans and plants, in a controlled environment. Marine aquaculture is also referred to as and arrange a talk countrysector/naso_southafrica/en
 topic should Mariculture. on the life support
 be 2. Controlled measures are put in place to enhance spawning, production, feeding and protection from systems and http://www.nda.agric.za/
 understood predators. mechanisms doaDev/sideMenu/
 is one in 3. South Africa’s aquaculture sector makes up 1% of the international aquaculture industry and 27% of African required to run a fisheries/03_areasofwork/
 which aquaculture. South Africa’s largest aquaculture production is from abalone farming. fish farm . Have an Aquaculture/
 learners 4. Principles guiding the management of an aquaculture facility include: aquarium vet AquaPolGuidLeg/
 should apply a. Maintaining a healthy ecosystem and water quality. discuss bio security AquaPolicyGuide/
 their b. Minimising the nutrient load of effluent water, recirculation and biological filtration of effluent, in such a facility. The%20User%20Friendly
 knowledge and minimising environmental impact on surrounding ecosystems. %20Legal%
 of other Have a mariculture 20Guideline%20for%20the%20
 c. Optimising the use of food and nutrition plans.
 topics manager discuss the Aquaculture%20Sector%20in%20
 studied up d. Managing food safety for the consumer. balances between South%20Af....pdf
 to this point. e. Application of genetics studies to increase productivity, growth rates and animal health. supply and demand.
 In addition f. Animal husbandry, including farm design for land-based or off-shore systems, and the carrying Costs of fish feed
 this topic capacity of systems. and the economic
 will form as g. Managing diseases and parasites. pressures relating
 a frame of 5. Multidisciplinary planning is required, which includes input from disciplines such as physiology, genetics, to costs from
 reference as biotechnology, ecology, nutrition, economics and engineering. electricity to food to
 further plant materials and
 6. Careful selection should be made of species that would cope with culture technologies and breeding
 topics in the transport costs.
 Ecology and techniques (eg artificial controlled spawning).
 Humans and 7. Correct techniques should be applied with regard to condition of brood stock, rearing at the larval stage,
 the Ocean spat production, and grow out or rearing programmes.
 strands are 8. Planning should ensure long-term sustainability of a facility, with consideration of the following aspects:
 introduced. a. Financial and economic – aquaculture needs to be profitable to be sustainable.
 The topic b. Markets.
 lends itself c. Social impact – such as sustainable employment.
 to higher
 d. Environmental impacts.
 level
 solutions e. Product, its value and sell-ability.
 based
 applications

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 155
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

83. Commercial use of Marine Algae
 Term 3 Strand – Humans and the Ocean

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 3 hours Commercial use (This material should appear in the Humans and Ocean section- A quick revision of the Macroalgae content
 of marine plants should be done, as part of the introduction to this section))
 and extracts Write a short article Internet
 The ocean is a source of natural resources, both living and non-living. on food dishes
 The Depth of this 1. Algae are collected by many cultures for food, fertiliser, medicine and as a source of specific produced from, or
 topic is at a level chemicals which can be used in industry. making use of, sea
 where learners 2. As the size of the human population increases, the demand for these resources grows. In many plant ingredients
 understand cases, the productivity of algae is so high that carefully managed harvesting from the wild can be
 Potential kept sustainable. Produce agar jelly Fresh red algae
 commercial 3. In other regions, algae harvesting has been unsustainable for many years, and various ways of from red sea plants from Gracilaria and
 ventures. farming the algae have been devised. Gelidium groups
 4. The process of farming marine organisms is called mariculture, which is a branch of the general This section lends
 farming of aquatic organisms (fresh or salt water) known as aquaculture. itself to a short See Two Oceans, A
 Sea Plant Mariculture literature review guide to Marine Life
 1. Sea-plant mariculture has been practised in the Far East for centuries. exercise of Southern Africa
 2. It is now practised extensively in South East Asia, Canada, USA, East Africa and several coastal (Branch et al.)
 European countries. It remains a labour intensive practice.
 3. Some sea plants, like Ulva sp and Porphyra sp, are cultivated to be consumed in raw, dried or
 processed forms (Ulva in salads, soups and stews and Porphyra to wrap sushi, amongst other
 products). Other sea plants are chemically treated to extract specific useful compounds.
 4. Kelps can be harvested and processed to be used as fertiliser and plant growth foods, as they are
 rich in minerals and plant growth hormones. (Kelpac in Simonstown harvests local sea bamboo for
 this purpose.)
 5. Many mariculture facilities use harvested sea plants as animal feed.
 Examples of sea plant products:
 Carrageenan
 1. Carrageenan is a family of complex sulphur-containing polysaccharides extracted from many red
 algae.
 2. It is used as stabiliser or gelling agent in meat, dairy and vegetarian products (eg yoghurt, processed
 chicken, almond milk and soy milk.)
 3. It thickens the product and prevents the ingredients in these products from separating.
 Agar
 1. Agar is a jelly-like substance obtained from certain red algae species.
 2. Used as a gelling ingredient in desserts.
156 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 3. Solid substrate to contain culture media for microbiological work in petri dishes (agar plates).
 4. Vegetarian substitute for gelatine.
 5. Also found in fruit preserves, jams and ice-cream, and used in the brewing industry to clarify
 beverages before bottling.
Algin(ate), also called alginic acid
 1. It is an extract obtained from pulped kelp.
 2. It is used as a thickener and a stabiliser in many foodstuffs, such as cheese and ice-cream.
 3. It also has uses in the medical field (iodine tablets, mineral supplements and dental moulding),
 textile industry (dyes and fibres), and many other industries (eg adhesives, explosives and welding).
Beta-carotene
 1. This is a red-orange pigment contained in certain seaweeds, particularly Chlorophyta.
 2. It is used as an antioxidant as it protects the body from free radicals (free radicals damage cells and
 may cause several chronic diseases).
 3. Human bodies convert beta-carotene into Vitamin A.
 4. Can be used as a yellow colourant in certain foodstuffs (eg margarine, mayonnaise and cheese).

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 157
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

84. Harvesting Ocean Energy
 Term 3 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources

 4 hours The depth at Introduction to Harvestable Energy found in the Ocean Develop solar and https://books.google.co.za/
 which this topic 1. As fossil fuels become depleted and ever more costly, and their emissions increase the levels of greenhouse wind power devices books?hl=en&lr=&id=SkzR
 should be gasses in the atmosphere, more scientists and engineers are looking to renewable energy sources. South Africa from a kit or BQAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PP1
 understood is depends almost entirely on non-renewable electricity (coal and nuclear). (Refer to Climate Change and Ocean components from &dq=harvesting+ocean+
 one in which Acidification). an electronics shop. energy&ots=Rth8X9WXWr
 learners should 2. Associated with offshore localities are high wind speeds that can potentially drive wind turbines to generate Eg Yebo Electronics &sig=IqjkUYEGzWWLtz2J_
 apply their electricity. Wind is the most effective renewable electricity generator associated with the ocean. OpWnGxJG5g#v=onepage
 knowledge of 3. The ocean is constantly moving – in the form of associated wind, waves, currents and tides. There is enormous &q=harvesting%20ocean%
 other topics potential for these natural forces to generate electrical energy; the ocean alone could generate more electricity 20energy&f=false
 studied up to this than humans need.
 point. In addition Ocean energy options
 this topic will
 form as a frame 4. Challenges to finding ocean energy solutions are the extreme force of wind, wave action and tidal flow, which
 of reference as damages equipment, and the corrosiveness of salt water on generator mechanisms.
 further topics in 5. Technology designs need to be fine-tuned to minimise their impact on habitats and species. Equipment that runs
 the Ecology and at a high torque and low speed has a relatively low impact on living organisms.
 Humans and the 6. Significant effort is being made to find solutions in Scotland, Australia, Florida, Oregon and California.
 Ocean strands Existing renewable energy solutions:
 are introduced. a) Wave energy mechanisms are anchored to the sea bed. At the surface a magnet is moved by the waves
 The topic lends and passes windings that is moved by waves. Waves drive hydraulic pumps and force an airflow that drives
 itself to higher fans.
 level solutions b) Currents are particularly strong off the Southern African east coast. These have the potential to drive
 based generators anchored to the sea bed.
 applications c) Wind farms have been constructed in Caledon, Darling and Jeffrey’s Bay. Some wind farms in Scotland and
 off the east coast of USA are mounted to the sea bed offshore and protrude above the ocean surface.
 d) Tidal movement currents off the South African coast are not viable for energy generation as the average
 tidal range is small (up to 1.8 m). It is estimated that current technology can effectively harvest tidal flows
 only if the average tide difference is 5+ metres. In places where the tidal difference is greater, the
 challenge is to manufacture anchor points that are large enough for the mechanisms.
 7. Much research and political will is required to find future solutions that are cost-effective for harvesting the
 energy referred to above, using mechanisms which can operate efficiently, generate adequate wattage, and
 connect reliably to the current electricity grids.
158 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

85. Biomimicry
 Term 3 Strand – Humans and the Oceans

 Time Depth Key Concepts Investigations Resources
 3 hours The depth at Biomimicry is a multidisciplinary field. It connects a range of careers and specialities with the Find the Ask Nature website https://sites.google.com/site/
 which this topic purpose of better understanding designs found in nature, and how those designs can be biomimicrysa/home
 should be imitated to efficiently answer technical, design and construction challenges. Investigate the design of shark
 understood is 1. Nature has probably solved every technological problem humans are likely to skin and sharkskin-mimicking http://www.biomimicryinstitute.org/
 one in which face. Whether we are trying to heat up or cool down, glue surfaces together, fly, paint
 learners should transport ourselves, provide shelter, package, preserve, synthesise or destroy (to http://www.asknature.org/
 apply their mention but a few), nature has done the task before. Investigate the byssal threads
 knowledge of 2. In nature we witness the perfect R&D (research and development) programme in used by mussels to anchor
 other topics the process of natural selection. (Revise Natural Selection.) themselves on rocks despite
 studied up to this 3. The implication is that designs in nature have been refined over millennia and have violent wave action
 point in terms of literally stood the test of time.
 Ecology and 4. Technologists, designers, engineers and architects can find solutions to their
 Humans and the problems in nature.
 Ocean strands 5. The connecting of biologists with designers is an example of how the field of
 are introduced. Biomimicry lowers barriers between professional specialities. Professionals in this
 The topic lends field find cooperative inter-disciplinary group effort to be more effective than
 itself to higher working alone.
 level solutions 6. Once a problem is identified, biologists or microbiologists are called to explain or
 based investigate how nature has found solutions to a similar problem.
 applications. 7. The challenges are put to the team, which then sets out to find solutions that might
 exist in nature and can be emulated in terms of structure, process or system.
 8. Technologists, designers and engineers then design a nature-inspired solution.
 (Mention marine related examples.)
 Biomimicry’s recognised guiding principles are:
 1. Use abundantly available materials.
 2. Manufacture at standard temperature and pressure.
 3. Biomimicked designs themselves become an inspiration for new designs; the design
 process evolves.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 159
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT IN MARINE SCIENCE

4.1 Introduction
Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information
on learners’ performance, using various forms of evaluation. It involves four steps: generating and
collecting evidence of achievement; evaluating this evidence, recording the findings and using this
information to understand and thereby assist the learners’ development in order to improve the process
of learning and teaching.

Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning).
In both cases, regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance their learning experience.

Assessment is a process that measures individual learners’ attainment of knowledge (content,
concepts and skills) in a subject by collecting, analysing and interpreting the data and information
obtained from this process to:

 • enable the teacher to make reliable judgements on the basis of the learners’ scores;
 • inform learners about their strengths, weaknesses and progress (assessment feedback is an
 imperative element of the process); and
 • assist teachers, parents and other stakeholders in making decisions about the learning
 process, the progress of the learners and developing a remedial study action plan to mentor
 all learners I an informed way to remediate methods of learning and remediate
 methodologies of teaching practice in Marine Sciences.

Assessment should be mapped against the content and intended aims specified for Marine Sciences
and in informal and formal assessments it is important to ensure that in the course of the year:

 • all of the subject content is covered;
 • the full range of skills is included; and
 • different forms of assessment are used.

4.2 Informal Assessment and Daily Assessment
Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on learners’
achievement that can be used to improve their learning.

Informal assessment is daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through activities such as
observations, discussions, practical demonstrations, learner-teacher conferences and informal
classroom interactions. Informal assessment may be as simple as stopping during the lesson to
observe learners or to discuss how their learning is progressing. Informal assessment should be used
to provide feedback to the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but it need not be recorded. It
should not be seen as separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom. Learners or

160 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

teachers can mark these assessment tasks.

Self-assessment and peer assessment actively involve the learners being assessed. This is important
as it allows learners to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal
daily assessment tasks are not formally recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. The results of
daily assessment tasks are not taken into account for promotion or certification purposes.

Informal, ongoing assessments should be used to structure the acquisition of knowledge and skills and
should be a precursor to formal tasks in the Programme of Assessment.

4.3 Formal Assessment

 Grades Formal school-based assessments End-of-year examinations

 R-3 100% n/a
 4-6 75% 25%
 7-9 40% 60%
 10 and 11 25% including a mid-year examination 75%
 12 25% including mid-year and trial External examination: 75%
 examinations

All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as formal
assessment. Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression
and certification purposes. All formal assessment tasks are subject to moderation to ensure that
appropriate standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are
progressing in a grade and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests,
examinations, practical tasks, projects, scientific poster presentations, oral presentations,
demonstrations and performances. Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal
Programme of Assessment in each grade and subject.

The cognitive demands in assessment should be appropriate for the ability and developmental level of
the learner. As the teaching progresses through the grades so the cognitive demand of the assessment
of the content is increased.

Assessment in Marine Sciences must cater for a range of cognitive levels among learners. The
assessment tasks should be carefully designed to cover the content of the subject as well as the range
of skills and the cognitive levels that have been identified in the specific aims. The design of
assessments should therefore ensure that a full range of content and skills are assessed within each
Grade in the Phase. The specific aims, topics, content and range of skills in the subject should be used
to inform the planning and development of assessments.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 161
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

Teachers should use the examples of verbs in the table below to guide their assessment of the Marine
Sciences curriculum at the appropriate cognitive levels. The verbs are arranged in terms of a
taxonomy of thinking [Bloom (1956), Kratwohl (2002) and Arthurs (2016)]. (see.
http://tos.org/oceanography/assets/docs/29-4_arthurs.pdf )

Weighting of Cognitive demands for the assessment of content in Grades 10, 11
and 12

 Recall Comprehend Apply Analyse,
 Evaluate
 Create

 % 40% 25% 20% 15%
 Examples of  Acquire  Abstract  Apply  Adapt
  Define  Calculate  Change  Appraise
 Useful Verbs
  Distinguish  Convert  Choose  Analyse
  Duplicate  Compare  Compute  Anticipate
  Label  Classify  Construct  Argue
  List  Defend  Demonstrate  Catalogue
  Match  Distinguish  Diagram 
  Name  Discuss  Generalise  Contrast
  Outline  Estimate  Implement  Create
  Recognise  Explain   Critique
  State  Extrapolate  Manipulate  Compare
  Give an example of  Modify  Contrast
  Identify  Plan  Deconstruct
  Illustrate  Predict  Defend
  Infer  Sequence  Discriminate
  Make a  Solve  Discuss
  Paraphrase  Use knowledge  Differentiate
  Rearrange  Hypothesise
  Summarise  Infer
  Invent
  Estimate
  Evaluate
  Explore
  Illustrate
  Investigate
  Justify
  Predict
  Rank
  Select
  Simulate
  Suggest a
 reason

162 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

4.4 Assessment Requirements for Marine Sciences

 4.4.1 Grade 10: Programme of Formal Assessment
 The programme of assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects
 in a school throughout a term.

 FORMAL, RECORDED, SCHOOL-BASED ASSESSMENTS END-OF-YEAR INTERNAL
 EXAMINATION 75%
 TEST/ ASIGNMENT PRACTICAL Two Written Practical
 examinations examination

 (2½ hours + 2½ (1 hour)
  Four tests = one test in each term  A selection of three representative  Thesehours)
 exams test  This exam tests
 (minimum of 50 marks each) practical tasks (30 marks each), which knowledge on practical
  Three selected practical tasks in cover the range of skills, these must be content, concepts knowledge and
 Terms 1 -3 marked and recorded. and skills across all Skills.
  One mid-year examination  One in each of the first three Terms. topics.  This should be set
 (2½ hours, 150 marks)  Knowledge of by each teacher
  One project/ assignment practical work taking into account
 Started in Term 1 and as well as some of the resources
 Assessed in Term 4 (50 marks) the skills related that are available
 to practical work for practical
 must be assessed in examination.
 the written
 examination.

 School-based Assessment (assessments completed during the year) is converted to 25% Final exam and final practical exam
 of the final mark. completed in the 4th 20%
 80% Term is converted to
 75% of the final mark
 term 1 term 2 term 3 term 4 Final Examination

  One test  One test  One test  One test

  Two Question papers 2½ hrs each
  One selected  One selected  One selected practical  One project/
  150x2=300marks
 practical task practical task task assignment
 Started in Term 1
 and Assessed in
  One project/  One Mid- year  Environmental term 4
 assignment examination studies: fieldwork
 Started in Term 1 150 marks
 and Assessed in  One Practical Exam
 term 4

 25% 25% 25% 25%

 Convert to 25% Convert to 75%

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 163
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 4.4.2 Grade 11: Programme of Formal Assessment
 The programme of assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects
 in a school throughout a term.

 FORMAL, RECORDED, SCHOOL-BASED ASSESSMENTS END-OF-YEAR INTERNAL
 EXAMINATION 75%
 TEST/ ASIGNMENT PRACTICAL Two Written Practical
 examinations examination

 (2½ hours + 2½ (1 hour)
  Four tests = one test in each term  A selection of three representative  Thesehours)
 exams test  This exam tests
 (minimum of 50 marks each) practical tasks (30 marks each), which knowledge on practical
  Three selected practical tasks in cover the range of skills, these must be content, concepts knowledge and
 Terms 1 -3 marked and recorded. and skills across all Skills.
  One mid-year examination  One in each of the first three Terms. topics.  This should be set
 (2½ hours, 150 marks)  Knowledge of by each teacher
  One project/ assignment practical work taking into account
 Started in Term 1 and as well as some of the resources
 Assessed in Term 4 (50 marks) the skills related that are available
 to practical work for practical
 must be assessed in examination.
 the written
 examination.

 School-based Assessment (assessments completed during the year) is converted to 25% Final exam and final practical exam
 of the final mark. completed
 80% in the 4th 20%
 Term is converted to
 75% of the final mark
 term 1 term 2 term 3 term 4 Final Examination

  One test  One test  One test  One test

  Two Question papers 2½ hrs each
  One selected  One selected  One selected practical  One project/
  150x2=300marks
 practical task practical task task assignment
 Started in Term 1
 and Assessed in
  One project/  One Mid- year  Environmental term 4
 assignment examination studies: fieldwork
 Started in Term 1 150 marks
 and Assessed in  One Practical Exam
 term 4

 25% 25% 25% 25%

 Convert to 25% Convert to 75%

164 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

4.4.3 Grade 12: Programme of Formal Assessment
 The programme of assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects
 in a school throughout a term.

 FORMAL, RECORDED, SCHOOL-BASED ASSESSMENTS
 TEST/ ASIGNMENT PRACTICAL

 • Three tests (minimum of 50 marks each)  A selection of three representative practical tasks
 (30 marks each), which cover the range of skills,
 • Two mid-year examination papers must be marked and recorded.

 (2½ hours each, 2 x 150 =300 marks)  One in each of the first three Terms. The best of
 the three marks is used when calculating the final
 • One trial examination (2 papers) year mark.

 (2½ hours each, 2 x 150 =300 marks)

 • One project/assignment

 (Can be done in any term but marked in term = 50 marks).

 • One practical must be done in each of Term 1; Term 2 and
 Term 3.

 SCHOOL-BASED ASSESSMENT

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3

  One test (50 marks)  One test (50 marks)  One test (50 marks)

  One selected practical task.
  One selected practical task  One selected practical
 task
  The trial (preliminary) examination should be set on
  One project/assignment. the work completed in Terms 1, 2 and 3.
 Started in Term 1 and  Mid-year examination Two papers 150 marks x2 = 300 marks
 Assessed at the beginning of Two papers 150 marks 
 term 3
 x2 = 300 marks).  One project/ assignment.
 Including the Started in Term 1 and Assessed at the beginning of
 Gr 11 4th Quarter term 3
 content.
 33% 33% 33%
 School based assessment of the three Terms is converted to 25% of the final mark
 Final National Examination in Term 4 = 75% of final mark.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 165
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

4.5 The End-of-Year Examinations:
4.5.1 Grade 10

 The examination will consist of two examination papers of 2½ hours and 150 marks each.
 The weighting and assessment of topics in Paper 1 and Paper 2 will be as follows:

 PAPER 1

 Topic Weighting

 % Marks
  Intro to Marine Sciences -to- History of Marine Discoveries 17 25
  Origin of planet earth -to- Geological time 7 11
  Topography of Ocean Floor -to- Light Absorption 30 44
  Tides -to- Nutrient Cycles 37 56
  Human Impacts -to- Biodiversity HIPPO 9 14

 Total 100% 150

 PAPER 2

  Life Processes and Cell Biology 30 45
  Evolution -to- Protists 26 38
  Porifera -to- Platyhelminthes 21 32
  Other unsegmented worms -to- Anthropod Groups 23 35

 Total 100% 150

 The weighting per topic must serve as a guideline for teachers; slight deviations in respect
 of the number of marks allocated to a topic are acceptable. The purpose of providing the
 weighting is to ensure that all topics are covered according to approximately the correct
 weighting

166 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

4.5.2 Grade 11

 The examination will consist of two examination papers of 2½ hours and 150 marks
 each. The weighting and assessment of topics in Paper 1 and Paper 2 will be as follows:

 PAPER 1

 Topic Weighting

 % Marks

  Marine Sciences Careers -to- Harvesting 16 24
 of Resources
  Sediments and Chemical composition of
 water –to- currents 28 42
  Population dynamics -to- Open Ocean 16 24
  Shores –to- Sandy beaches 24 36
  History of Ocean Discoveries -to-
 Ecotourism 16 24
 Total 100% 150

 PAPER 2
  Metabolic Processes -to- Cell Division 33 50
  Genetics -to- Microalgae 19 28
  Seaweeds -to- Vascular plants 20 30
  Mollusca -to- Bryzoa 17 25
  Echinoderm classes 11 17

 Total 100% 150

 The weighting per topic must serve as a guideline for teachers; slight deviations in
 respect of the number of marks allocated to a topic are acceptable. The purpose of
 providing the weighting is to ensure that all topics are covered in approximately the
 correct weighting.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 167
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

4.5.3 Grade 12

 The examination will consist of two examination papers of 2½ hours and 150
 marks each. The weighting and assessment of topics in Paper 1 and Paper 2 will
 be as follows:

 PAPER 1
 Topic Weighting

 % Marks

  Shores Rocky and Sandy Beaches Gr 11 19 29
 4th Quarter content
  History of Ocean Discovery -to- Ecotourism 12 18
  Diving Science Gas Laws -to- Waves 17 25
  Chemical composition of Water -to- Coastal 20 30
 Formations
  Climate change –to- Aquaculture 16 24
  Commercial use Marine Algae and Biomimicry 16 24

 Total 100% 150

 PAPER 2

  Echinoderms Gr 11 4th Quarter content 19 29
  Chordata -to- Agnatha 13 19
  Chondrichthys 16 24
  Osteicthyes 16 24
  Terrestrial vertebrates and Marine Reptiles 16 24
  Marine Birds and Mammals 20 30

 Total 100% 150

 The weighting per topic must serve only as a guideline to teachers and
 examiners and is included to ensure that all topics are adequately covered in
 examinations. The number of marks per topic is not expected to be exactly
 according to this weighting in the examination papers.

4.6 Recording and Reporting
Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific
assessment task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of knowledge as prescribed
in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement. Records of learner performance should provide
evidence of the learner’s conceptual progression within a grade and her or his readiness to progress or

168 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

be promoted to the next grade. Records of learner performance should also be used to verify the
progress made by teachers and learners during the teaching and learning process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools, and other
stakeholders. Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards,
parents’ meetings, school visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or
school newsletters. For all grades, teachers report learners’ achievements in percentages next to the
appropriate subject. The various achievement levels and their corresponding percentage bands are as
shown in the table below.

Note: The seven-point scale should have clear descriptions that give detailed information for each
level. Teachers will record actual marks against the task by using a record sheet; and report percentages
against the subject on the learners’ report cards.

Codes and Percentages for reporting in Grades R-12

 RATING CODE DESCRIPTION OF COMPETENCE PERCENTAGE

 7 Outstanding achievement 80- 100
 6 Meritorious achievement 70 - 79
 5 Substantial achievement 60 - 69
 4 Adequate achievement 50 - 59
 3 Moderate achievement 40 - 49
 2 Elementary achievement 30 - 39
 1 Not achieved 0 - 29

Schools are required to provide quarterly feedback to parents on the Programme of Assessment
using a formal reporting tool such as a report card. The schedule and the report card should indicate
the overall level of a learners’ performance.

4.7 Moderation of Assessment
Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable.
Moderation should be implemented at school and district level and if necessary also at provincial
level. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation practices must be in place for the quality assurance
of all subject assessments.

4.7.1 Grades 10 and 11

In Grades 10 and 11 Formal School-based Assessment and the Practical Assessment Tasks should
be moderated by the relevant subject specialists at district and, if necessary, provincial levels in
consultation with the moderators at the school. Moderation serves six purposes:

 1. it should ascertain whether the subject-specific content and skills are sufficiently covered.

 2. the moderator must ensure that the various levels of cognitive demand are reflected in the
 assessments.

 3. that the assessments and marking are of an acceptable standard and consistency.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 169
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 4. to ensure that assessment in different schools are more or less comparable whilst recognising
 that different teachers have different standards.

 5. to identify areas in which the teacher may need further support and development and to
 provide such necessary support

 6. Teachers must see the moderation process as an opportunity to evaluate their teaching skills
 and to seek assistance in areas where learners are generally underperforming. It is an
 opportunity for peer to peer teacher mentoring and elevating the Marine Sciences teaching
 profession.

In Grades 10 and 11 there is no compulsory national moderation. Moderation is therefore an ongoing
process and not a once-off end-of-year event.

4.7.2 Grade 12

Moderation refers to the process which ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable.
Moderation should be implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and
appropriate moderation practices must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

4.7.2.1 Formal Assessment (school-based assessment - SBA)

In Grade 12, moderation must take place at four levels:

 1. School-based moderation and verification of learner performance

 This is intended to ensure that the assessments meet the requirements in terms of content,
 cognitive demands and skills; that the marking has been consistent and fair and that the marks
 are a true reflection of learners’ performance in the assessments. This will enable the school to
 easily identify problems related to the pacing, standard and reliability of assessment and to ensure
 that appropriate interventions are put in place early. This is an ongoing process.

 2. Moderation by the subject advisor
 This is also an ongoing process. Subject advisors should moderate assessments, to ascertain
 whether:
 • Subject-specific content and skills have been covered adequately;
 • The prescribed number of assessments have been complied with;
 • the appropriate cognitive demands are reflected in the assessments;
 • the marking is of an acceptable standard and is consistent;
 • the assessments in different schools are comparable whilst recognising that
 different teachers teach and assess differently.

Subject advisors should provide teachers with the necessary guidance and support should any
shortcomings be identified. Early identification of shortcomings and early interventions are essential.
It is therefore necessary that moderation at this level should be ongoing and not a once-off end-of-year
event.

170 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Marine Sciences Grades 10-12

 3. Moderation by the province

Moderation of SBA at this level is once-off and is related to the quality assurance processes that
are necessary developed jointly by the Department of Basic Education and Umalusi in terms of
National Policy.

 4. At a national level

Statistical moderation of learner performance in the School Based Assessment is necessary to ensure
comparability across schools, districts, and provinces.

Note that, in Grade 12, the assessment of Practical work is incorporated into the SBA (per term). There
is no practical examination. This is because schools are not all equally resourced and some learners may
be disadvantaged because of this.

4.8 General
This document should be read in conjunction with:

4.8.1 National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

4.8.2 The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12.

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS) 171