National Curriculum Statement (NCS)

 Curriculum Assessment
TECHNICAL SCIENCES

 Policy Statement

 GRADES 10 – 12
 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY
 STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADES 10 – 12
 TECHNICAL SCIENCES

CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 1
 DISCLAIMER

In view of the stringent time requirements encountered by the Department of Basic Education to effect the necessary
editorial changes and layout adjustments to the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements and the supplementary
policy documents, possible errors may have occurred in the said documents placed on the official departmental website.

If any editorial, layout, content, terminology or formulae inconsistencies are detected, the user is kindly requested to
bring this to the attention of the Department of Basic Education.

E-mail: capscomments@dbe.gov.za or fax (012) 328 9828

Department of Basic Education

222 Struben Street

Private Bag X895

Pretoria 0001

South Africa

Tel: +27 12 357 3000

Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street Private Bag X9023

Cape Town 8000

South Africa

Tel: +27 21 465 1701

Fax: +27 21 461 8110

Website:http://www.education.gov.za

© 2014 Department of Basic Education

ISBN: 978- 4315-0573-9

Design and Layout by: Department of Basic Education

Printed by: Government Printing Works

 2 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 FOREWORD BY THE MINISTER
 Our national curriculum is the culmination of our efforts over a period of seventeen
 years to transform the curriculum bequeathed to us by apartheid. From the start of
 democracy we have built our curriculum on the values that inspired our Constitution
 (Act 108 of 1996). The Preamble to the Constitution states that the aims of the
 Constitution are to:

 • heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values,
 social justice and fundamental human rights;

 • improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person;

 • lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is
 based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by law; and

 • build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a
 sovereign state in the family of nations.

Education and the curriculum have an important role to play in realising these aims.

In 1997 we introduced outcomes-based education to overcome the curricular divisions of the past, but the experience
of implementation prompted a review in 2000. This led to the first curriculum revision: the Revised National Curriculum
Statement Grades R-9 and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (2002).

Ongoing implementation challenges resulted in another review in 2009 and we revised the Revised National Curriculum
Statement (2002) to produce this document.

From 2012 the two 2002 curricula, for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12 respectively, are combined in a single document
and will simply be known as the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. The National Curriculum Statement for
Grades R-12 builds on the previous curriculum but also updates it and aims to provide clearer specification of what is to
be taught and learnt on a term-by-term basis.

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 accordingly replaces the Subject Statements, Learning Programme
Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines with the

(a) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS) for all approved subjects listed in this document;

(b) National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement
 Grades R – 12; and

(c) National Protocol for Assessment Grades R – 12.

MRS ANGIE MOTSHEKGA, MP
MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 3
 CONTENTS
SECTION 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS FOR 5
 TECHNICAL SCIENCES GRADES 10 – 12
1.1 Background 5
1.2 Overview 5
1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum 6
1.4 Time Allocation 7
 1.4.1 Foundation Phase 7
 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase 8
 1.4.3 Senior Phase 8
SECTION 2: THE AIMS AND PURPOSE OF TECHNICAL SCIENCES 9
2.1 The Aims and Purpose of Technical Sciences 9
2.2 Overview of Topics 10
2.3 Overview of Practical Work 12
2.5 Weighting of Topics [40 Week Programme] 15
2.6 Overview of Formal Assessment and Recommended Informal Experiments 15
SECTION 3: THE AIMS AND PURPOSE OF TECHNICAL SCIENCES 16
SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT 56
4. Assessment 56
4.1 Introduction 56
4.2 Informal or daily assessment 56
4.3 Formal assessment 57
 4.3.1 Control tests & examinations 57
 4.3.2 Practical investigations & experiments 57
 4.3.3 Projects 57
4.4 Programme of Assessment 58
 4.4.1 Programme of formal assessment for Grades 10, 11 and 12 58
 4.4.2 End-of-year Examinations 59
 4.4.2.1 Grades 10 and 11 (internal assessment) 59
 4.4.2.2 Grade 12 (external assessment) 59
 4.4.2.3 Year-end Examination Content for Paper 1 and Paper 2: Technical Science 60
 4.4.2.4 Weighting of topics in papers 1 and 2 60
4.5 Recording and reporting 61
 4.5.1 Recording and reporting in the first, second and third terms 61
 4.5.2 Recording and reporting on the Assessment Tasks and SBA in the Programme of Assessment 61
 4.5.3 Recording and reporting at the end of the academic year 61
4.6 Moderation of Assessment 61
 4.6.1 SBA 61
 4.6.2 PAT 62
4.7 General 62
 4.7.1 [National Protocol of Assessment] An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior 62
 Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF),
 regarding the National Protocol for Assessment (Grades R – 12).
 4.7.2 Progression and Promotion Requirements Grades 1 – 12. 62
 4.7.3 Subject specific exam guidelines as contained in the draft policy document: 62

 4 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SECTION 1
INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS FOR TECHNICAL SCIENCES

 GRADES 10 – 12

1.1 Background

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the schooling
sector. To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming into
effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was developed for each
subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines in Grades
R – 12.

1.2 Overview

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for learning
 and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R – 12 (January 2012).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (January 2012) replaces the two current national curricula
 statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of 31 May 2002,
 and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10 – 12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6 October 2003 and
 No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b (i) and (ii) comprise the following policy
 documents, which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (January
 2012) during the period 2012 – 2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment
 Guidelines for Grades R – 9 and Grades 10 – 12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the General Education
 and Training Band, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in Government Gazette No. 29626 of 12
 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications
 Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette No.27819 of 20 July 2005;CAPS)

 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at
 Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special needs, published
 in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy document, National
 policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 5
 Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12; and

 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification
 at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol for Assessment
 (Grades R – 12), promulgated in Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette No. 29467 of 11
 December 2006.

(d) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy as contemplated
 in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the National Curriculum Statement
 Grades R – 12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South African Schools Act,1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,)
 form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to determine minimum outcomes and standards, as well as the
 processes and procedures for the assessment of learner achievement to be applicable to public and independent
 schools.

1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values worth
 learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply knowledge and
 skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes knowledge in local
 contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 serves the purposes of:

• equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability or intellectual
 ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment, and meaningful participation in society
 as citizens of a free country;

• providing access to higher education;

• facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and

• providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 is based on the following principles:

• Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that equal
 educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;

• Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than rote and uncritical
 learning of given truths;

• High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at each grade are
 specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;

TECHNICAL SCIENCES

• Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

• Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices of social and
 environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 is sensitive to issues of diversity such as poverty, inequality, race, gender,
 language, age, disability and other factors;

• Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country as important
 contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

• Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and depth to those
 of other countries.

 6 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 (d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

• identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;

• work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

• organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;

• collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

• communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;

• use science and technology effectively and critically, showing responsibility towards the environment and the
 health of others; and

• demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem solving
 contexts do not exist in isolation.

(e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This can only
 happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to learning, and how
 to plan for diversity.

The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant support
structures within the school community, including teachers, District-based Support Teams, Institutional-level, Support
Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers in the classroom, teachers should use
various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those included in the Department of Basic Education’s Guidelines
for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

1.4 Time Allocation

1.4.1 Foundation Phase

(a) The instructional time for each subject in the Foundation Phase is indicated in the table below:

 Subject Time allocation per week (hours)
 i. Languages (FAL and HL) 10 (11)
 ii. Mathematics 7
 iii. Life Skills 6 (7)
 • Beginning Knowledge 1 (2)
 • Creative Arts 2
 • Physical Education 2
 • Personal and Social Well-being 1

(b) Total instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) To Languages 10 hours are allocated in Grades R – 2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8 hours and
 a minimum of 7 hours are allocated to Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and a maximum of 3 hours
 to First Additional Language in Grades R – 2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are
 allocated to Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours and a maximum of 4 hours to First Additional Language.

(d) To Life Skills Beginning Knowledge 1 hour is allocated in Grades R – 2 and 2 hours are allocated for Grade 3,
 as indicated by the hours in brackets.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 7
 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

(a) The table below shows the subjects and instructional times allocated to each in the Intermediate Phase.

 Subject Time allocation per week (hours)
 i. Home Language 6
 ii. First Additional Language 5
 iii. Mathematics 6
 iv. Science and Technology 3.5
 v. Social Sciences 3
 vi. Life Skills 4
 vii. Creative Arts 1.5
 viii. Physical Education 1.5
 ix. Religious Studies 1

1.4.3 Senior Phase

(b) The instructional time for each subject in the Senior Phase is allocated as follows:

 Subject Time allocation per week (hours)
 i. Home Language 5

 ii. First Additional Language 4

 iii. Mathematics 4.5

 iv. Natural Sciences 3

 v. Social Sciences 3

 vi. Technology 2

 vii. Economic Management Sciences 2

 viii. Life Orientation 2

 ix. Arts and Culture 2

1.4.4 Grades 10 – 12

(a) The instructional time for each subject in Grades 10 – 12 is allocated as follows:

 Subject Time allocation per week (hours)
 i. Home Language 4.5
 ii. First Additional Language 4.5
 iii. Mathematics (Technical Mathematics) 4.5
 iv. Mathematical Literacy 4.5
 v. Life Orientation 2
 vi. Three Electives 12 (3x4h)

The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum number of required NCS subjects as specified
above, and may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish
to pursue additional subjects, additional time has to be allocated in order to offer these subjects.

ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)

 8 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SECTION 2
2.1 THE AIMS AND PURPOSE OF TECHNICAL SCIENCES

The main aim of Technical Sciences is to support learners in the three focus areas of technology, namely Mechanical
Technology, Electrical Technology and Civil Technology. Learners will have an NQF level 4 competence in Technical
Science.

Learners at Technical High Schools will be able to integrate scientific knowledge in a more informed way in their subject
offerings in technology. Scientific concepts and skills will be more accessible to learners that have a technical orientation
in schooling. Technical Sciences will address the needs of the industry and the technology subjects by being an enabling
subject to promote technology study in schools.

Skills that learners will acquire include classifying, communicating, measuring, designing an investigation, drawing
and evaluating conclusions, formulating models, hypothesizing, identifying and controlling variables, observing and
comparing, interpreting, predicting, problem-solving and reflecting. The main skills will be practical application and
observing simulations.

Technical Sciences will prepare learners for further education and training, employment, citizenship, holistic development
and socio-economic development. Learners choosing Technical Sciences as a subject in Grades 10 – 12 will have
improved access to applied technology courses, vocational career paths and entrepreneurial opportunity. Technical
Sciences will also promote skills development in the fields of technology, thus promoting economic growth and social
well-being of more citizens in our country.

The six main knowledge areas that Technical Sciences comprises of are:

• Mechanics

• Matter and Materials

• Electricity and Magnetism

• Waves, Sound and Light

• Heat and Thermodynamics

• Chemical Change

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 9
 2.2 OVERVIEW OF TOPICS

TOPIC CONTENT
Mechanics Grade10 Units and measurements, Scientific notation, Working with
 formulae, Rate, Vectors and scalars (Vectors, scalars, graphical
 representation of vectors), Motion in one dimension: (position,
 displacement, distance, speed, velocity, acceleration), Introduction
 of Force (Definition of force, contact force, non-contact force), Kinds
 of forces (Tension, normal force, force of gravity, frictional Force),
 Force diagram and free body diagram, Resultant and Equilibrant,
 Equilibrium of forces in one dimension, Moment of a Force
 (Torque) (Laws of moments), Simple Machines (Lever, fulcrum, types
 of levers, mechanical advantage), Energy (gravitational potential
 energy, kinetic energy, mechanical energy) (53 hours)
 Grade 11 Introduction to Mechanics (Sign conventions, graphs, Theorem of
 Pythagoras), Co-linear vectors, co-planar vectors, Resultant of forces
 in two dimensions (head-to-tail method, Theorem of Pythagoras,
 Parallelogram of forces), Resolution of a forces into components,
 Frictional forces (Static frictional force, Kinetic frictional force) (32
 hours)
 Grade 12 Newton’s laws of motion (Newton’s First Law of motion, inertia, mass,
 acceleration, Newton’s Second Law of motion, Newton’s Third Law
 of motion), Momentum (Impulse and change in momentum), Work
 energy and Power (Work, Energy, Conservation of mechanical energy,
 Power, Power and velocity). Elasticity (Deforming force, restoring force,
 elasticity, perfectly elastic body, elastic limit, stress, strain, Hooke’s Law,)
 Viscosity (effect of temperature on viscosity, motor oil viscosity grades),
 Hydraulics (Thrust, pressure, practical unit of pressure, fluid pressure,
 Pascal’s Law, hydraulic lift) (46 hours)
 Matter and Materials Grade 10 Classification of Matter (Pure substances, elements, compounds,
 naming of compounds, cation and anion table, molecular formulae,
 balancing of equations), Metals, Metalloids and Non-metals,
 Electrical conductors, semiconductors and insulators,
 Thermal conductors and insulators, Magnetic and non-magnetic,
 Structure of the atom (Atomic Number, mass number, isotopes, The
 Periodic Table, electron configuration) (31 hours)
 Grade 12 Electronic Properties of Matter (Semiconductor, intrinsic
 semiconductor, doping, n-type semiconductor, p type semiconductor, p-n
 junction diode) (4 hours)
 Organic chemistry (Organic molecules, molecular and structural
 formulae, functional group, homologous series, saturated hydrocarbons,
 unsaturated hydrocarbons, isomers, IUPAC naming and formulae,
 physical properties of organic compounds, reactions of organic
 compounds, plastics and polymers) (12 hours)
 Waves and Sound Grade 11 Pulses (Transverse pulses, longitudinal pulses)
 Waves (Transverse wave, longitudinal wave), Wave Terminology
 (Amplitude, crest, trough, points in phase, wavelength, period,
 frequency, wave speed) Superposition of waves (constructive
 interference, destructive interference). Sound waves (Speed of sound
 in different media, reflection of sound, echo, pitch, loudness, range of
 sound frequencies) (33 hours)
 Grade 12 Light (Reflection of light, Refraction, Critical angle, total internal
 reflection, Dispersion, lenses) Electromagnetic radiation (Nature
 of Electromagnetic radiation, properties of electromagnetic radiation,
 electromagnetic spectrum, uses of electromagnetic radiation, photons,
 energy of a photon)
 (12 hours)

 10 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Electricity and Grade 10 Electrostatics (Two kinds of charge, charge conservation). Electric
 Magnetism circuits (Components of a circuit, current, potential difference, emf,
 measurement of voltage and current), resistance, resistors in series,
 resistors in parallel)
 (25 hours)
 Grade 11 Magnetism (Magnets, the magnetic field, poles of permanent magnet,
 direction of magnetic field, magnetic field of a bar magnet, force a
 magnet, properties of magnetic field lines, earth’s magnetic field) (8
 hours)
 Electrostatics (Coulomb’s Law, electric field, electric field lines, electric
 field between parallel plates, applications of electrostatics) (10 hours)
 Electric circuits (Ohm’s Law, ohmic and non- ohmic conductors, circuit
 calculations, emf, internal resistance) (17 hours)
 (Total = 35 hours)
 Grade 12 Electrostatics (Capacitor, capacitance, factors affecting capacitance)
 Electric circuits
 (Power, heating effect of electric current)
 Electromagnetism (Magnetic effect of a current-carrying conductor,
 electromagnetic induction Faraday’s Law, magnetic flux, magnetic flux
 density, Lenz’s Law, transformer, generator, motor)
 (28 hours)
Heat and Grade 10 Heat and Temperature (Heat, temperature, different types of
Thermodynamics thermometers, Celsius scale, kelvin scale)
 (6 hours)
 Grade 11 Heat (Specific heat capacity and heat capacity, practical application of
 heat capacity, Law of conservation of heat)
 Thermodynamics (Terminologies, thermodynamic system, surrounding,
 open system, closed system, isolated system, thermodynamic variables
 or co-ordinates, internal energy of a thermodynamic system, first Law
 of Thermodynamics, working substance, heat engine, efficiency of heat
 engine, second law of thermodynamics, refrigerators)
 (13 hours)
Chemical Change Grade 11 Oxidation and reduction (Oxidation, reduction, oxidizing agent,
 reducing agent, assigning oxidation numbers)
 Electrolysis (Electrolyte, cathode, anode)
 (14 hours)
 Grade 12 Electrochemical cells (Electrolytic cells, galvanic cells, components
 of galvanic cells, half reactions, net reaction, standard conditions, ionic
 movement, standard cell notation, emf of a cell)
 Alternate Energies (Biodiesel, fuel cells, photovoltaic cells)
 (10 hours)

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 11
 2.3 OVERVIEW OF PRACTICAL WORK

Practical work must be integrated with theory to strengthen the concepts being taught. These may take the form of
simple practical demonstrations or even an experiment or practical investigation. There are several practical activities
given alongside the content, concepts and skills columns throughout Section 3. Some of these practical activities
will be done as part of formal assessment and others can be done as part of informal assessment. Below is a table
that lists prescribed practical activities for formal assessment as well as recommended practical activities for informal
assessment across Grades 10 to 12.

 Grade Term Prescribed Practical Activities Recommended Practical Activities
 Formal Assessment Informal Assessment
 Term 1 Experiment (formal): Experiment:
 Use spring balances to demonstrate the Measure the velocity of a trolley.
 resultant and equilibrant. Experiment:
 Measure the weight of different objects
 using a spring balance.
 Grade 10 Term 2 Experiment (formal): Experiment:
 Use a meter stick and mass pieces to Determine the mechanical advantage of a
 prove the laws of moments. type 1 lever.
 Experiment (formal):
 Determine the potential energy of an object
 at different heights.
 Term 3 Project (formal): Experiment:
 Do a research project related to To investigate the insulation ability of
 Technology. Example: Use of levers in polystyrene cup.
 Technology.
 Experiment (formal): Experiment:
 Determine the electrical conductivity of To determine whether a given material is
 different materials. magnetic or nonmagnetic.
 Experiment:
 To investigate the two kinds of charges.
 Experiment:
 Construct an electric circuit to measure
 current through a resistor and the voltage
 across a resistor; draw diagrams of the
 circuits.
 Term 4 Experiment: Investigate the factors that
 affect the resistance of a conductor.

 Experiment:
 Assemble a circuit to show that a series
 circuit is a voltage divider, while current
 remains constant.

 Experiment:
 Assemble a circuit to show that a parallel
 circuit is a current divider, while potential
 difference remains constant.

 Experiment:
 Measure the melting point of wax.

 12 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Grade Term Prescribed Practical Activities Recommended Practical Activities
 Formal Assessment Informal Assessment
 Term 1 Experiments (formal): Experiment:
 Use the parallelogram of forces to: a) Determine the relation between the
 a) Determine the resultant of two forces force of limiting friction and the normal
 acting a point. force.
 b) Determine the weight of given body.
Grade 11 b) Determine the coefficient of friction
 between a block and horizontal
 surface.

 Experiment:
 Determine the north pole of the earth by
 using a bar magnet.

 Experiment:
 a) Determine whether a material is a
 magnetic material or a magnet.
 b) Determine the polarity of the magnets.

 Experiment:
 Mapping a magnetic field.
 Term 2 Experiment (formal): Experiment:
 a) Determine the speed of sound in air. Use a ripple tank to demonstrate
 b) Determine whether sound travels in a constructive and
 vacuum. destructive interference of two pulses.

 Experiment (formal):
 Determine the difference between pitch
 and loudness using an oscilloscope.

 Term 3 Experiment (formal): Experiment:
 Determine the resistance of an unknown Obtain current and voltage data for a
 resistor. piece of copper wire and semi-conductor,
 Project: and determine which obeys Ohm’s law.
 Do a research project related to
 Technology. Example: Use of electrostatics Experiment:
 in Technology. Determine the internal resistance of a
 battery.
 Experiment:
 Determine the heat capacity of a solid.
 Term 4 Experiment:
 Electrolysis of a salt solution.

CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 13
 Grade Term Prescribed Practical Activities Recommended Practical Activities
 Formal Assessment Informal Assessment
 Term 1 Experiment (formal): Experiment:
 Determine the relationship between Show that the action-reaction pairs cancel
 acceleration and force for a constant mass. each other.
 Experiment:
 To determine if momentum is conserved
 Grade during a collision.
 12 Experiment:
 Determine the power output of a learner.
 Term 2 Experiment (formal): Experiment:
 Determine the path of a ray of light Determine the position of an image in a
 through a glass slab for different angles of flat mirror.
 incidence.
 Term 3 Experiment (formal): Experiment:
 To determine the electrode potential of a Determine the power dissipated in bulbs
 Cu-Zn electrochemical cell. connected
 either in series or parallel or both in series
 and both in parallel.
 Experiment:
 Determine the current rating of a fuse.
 Experiment:
 Determine the effect of the change in
 magnetic field or magnetic flux in a coil.
 Experiment:
 Study the characteristics of p-n junction
 diode.

 Term 4

2.4

 14 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 2.5 WEIGHTING OF TOPICS [40 WEEK PROGRAMME]

 TOPICS GRADE 10 GRADE 11 GRADE 12
 % % %
 Mechanics 46 25 47
 Waves, sound and light 0 26 13
 Electricity and magnetism 22 28 18
 Matter and materials 27 0 13
 Chemical change 0 11 10
 Heat and thermodynamics 5 10 0

2.6 OVERVIEW OF FORMAL ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDED INFORMAL EXPERIMENTS

For Grades 10 and 11, FOUR prescribed experiments are done per year as formal assessment (one experiment per
term for terms 1 to 4). For Grade 12, THREE prescribed experiments are done per year as formal assessment (one
experiment per term for terms 1, 2 and 3). TWO control tests and TWO examinations are written as formal assessment
in each of Grades 10 and 11. ONE control test, ONE midyear examination, ONE trial examination and ONE final
examination are written as formal assessment for Grade 12.

ONLY in Grade 10 and Grade 11, ONE project is done per year as formal assessment or an integrated Chemistry/
Physics project (started in term 1 and assessed in term 3). Any ONE of the recommended projects can be done or any
ONE of the experiments can be done as a practical investigation, or any other topic of choice can be used as a project.
It is recommended that the project topic is given to learners early in the first term so that learners can start the project.
The final assessment of the project is done and recorded in the third term. In Grade 12 NO project is done.

There are 11 informal experiments for Grade 10, nine recommended informal experiments for Grade 11 and nine
recommended informal experiments for Grade 12.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 15
 SECTION 3
 TECHNICAL SCIENCES CONTENT (GRADES 10 – 12)

 TERM 1 GRADE 10
 MECHANICS
 Guidelines for
Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
3 hrs Units and • CGS units. Focus on conversions
 measurements • List seven fundamental units of SI system. within metric system
 to basic SI units.
 • Derived units.
 • Prefixes. Focus on conversions
 • Conversion of units: CGS units to SI units and from km to m and
 vice versa. from h to s.
 • Focus on conversion on units related to
 technology.
2 hrs Scientific notation • Use scientific notation to express number as
 a power.
 • Focus on examples using scientific notation
 related to technology.
2 hrs Working with formulae • Identify the correct formula. Reinforce the
 • Substitute the given values into the formula. meaning of the
 symbols in the
 • Solve for the unknown quantity.
 formula
 • Develop examples to solve problems using e.g. P-pressure,
 equations from p-momentum
 • Technology. V-volume,
 v-velocity
2 hrs Rate • Rate is the change in a physical quantity in unit Give additional
 time. examples related
 • Give examples related to the concept of rate in technology.
 technology.
6 hrs Vectors and scalars Test learner’s
 knowledge in
 Vectors • Define a vector quantity. identifying vectors
 and scalars.

 Scalars
 • Define a scalar quantity.
 Give examples from
 • Give examples of vectors and scalars. technology and IKS.
 • Differentiate between vector and scalar
 quantities.

 16 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Guidelines for
Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 Graphical representation • Represent vectors graphically. Maximum of four
 of vectors • Identify the properties of vectors: equal vectors, vectors.
 negative vectors, addition and subtraction of
 vectors.
 N.B. Use one dimension applications only.

 • Define resultant vector as: The resultant of two
 or more vectors is the single vector which can
 produce the same effect as the two or more
 vectors.
 • Find resultant of two or more vectors in different
 directions:

 (a) graphically use the tail-to-head method.
 (b) by calculation.
6 hrs Motion in one • Define one dimensional motion as motion Use conceptual
 dimension along a line either forward or backward. examples to show
 that distance is a
 Position • Define position as location of an object relative scalar and
 to the origin. displacement is a
 vector.
 Distance • Define distance as actual path length between
 two points.

 SI unit: m

 Displacement • Define displacement as the shortest path
 between two points in a particular direction.

 SI unit: m
 • Differentiate between displacement and
 distance.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 17
 and distance. between displacement
 • Differentiate
 Time Topic Grade 10 and distance.
 • Differentiate
 Content, Concepts between displacement Guidelines for
 & Skills
 and distance. Teachers
 Guidelines for
 Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 Guidelines for
 Time Topic Grade 10 • Define
 Speed Content, Concepts
 speed as rate&ofSkillsdistance. Teachers
 Guidelines for
Time Topic
 Speed Grade 10 • Content,speed
 Define Concepts as & Skills
 rate of distance.
 Speed = Teachers
 Speed
 Speed • Define
 Speed =
 • speed
 Define as
 speed rate
 as theof distance.
 rate of change of distance.
 SISpeed
 unit: m.s
 Speed = -1
 Velocity SI unit: m.s-1-1
 SI unit: m.s -1 as rate of
 • Define
 Velocity SI unit:velocity
 m.s
 displacement.
 • Define velocity as rate of
 Velocity
 Velocity • Define velocity as rate of change of
 displacement.
 • Define velocity as rate of
 displacement.
 displacement.
 Velocity =
 Velocity
 Velocity ==

 Acceleration
 SIVelocity
 unit: m.s =-1
 SI unit: m.s-1-1
 SI unit: m.s
 Acceleration • Define acceleration as the rate of
 Acceleration m.s-1 acceleration
 SI• unit:Define as the rate of change of
 Acceleration change
 • Defineof velocity.
 acceleration as the rate of
 velocity.
 change
 • Defineofacceleration
 velocity. as the rate of
 change of velocity.
 Acceleration
 Acceleration ==
 Acceleration
 SI unit: m.s-2 =
 unit: m.s-2 =
 SIAcceleration
 Experiment 1 -2
 SI• unit:Do m.scalculations using the above concepts.
 Experiment 1 • Do
 Experiment 1
 unit: m.sthe velocity ofthe
 calculations
 SIDetermine -2 using
 a
 above
 trolley
 Experiment 1 concepts.
 • Do calculations using the above
 (Materials: Ticker timer, tape, power supply, trolley,
 concepts.
 • ruler
 Do calculations
 etc.) using the above
 concepts.
2 hrs Introduction of Force Determine the velocity of a trolley
 (Materials:
 DetermineTicker timer, of
 the velocity tape, power
 a trolley
 Definition of force supply,
 • trolley,
 Define
 Determine Ticker
 (Materials: ruler
 force as
 the velocity etc.)
 a push
 timer,oftape,or a pull.
 power
 a trolley
 supply,
 (Materials:trolley, ruler
 Ticker etc.)tape, power
 timer,
 SI unit of force is newton (N)
 supply, trolley, ruler etc.)
 23
 23
 23

 18 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Non-contact force
 • In non-contact forces the forces forces.
 bodies
 work over a distance must
 • In non-contact
 withoutbe in contact
 forces
 actual thewith forces one contact and
 contact. another.
 work over a distance without actual non-contact
 2 hrs Non-contact
 Kinds of forces force contact. forces.
 • In non-contact forces the forces
 Time Tension
 Topic Grade 10
 work
 • Define
 Content,
 over a distance
 tension
 Concepts as without
 force
 & Skills acting actual
 in a Guidelines for
 contact. Teachers
2 hrs Kinds of forces string or rope. Demonstrate
 Contact force • In contact forces the interacting bodies must Identify some contact
 2 hrs Normal
 Kinds of force
 forces physically touch one another.
 the directions
 and non-contact
 Tension Non-contact •force Define tension • Define
 as normal
 force acting force, in a , as the of each of the
 forces.
 • In non-contact forces the forces work over
 Tension string or rope. • Define
 perpendicular tension force as force
 exerted acting
 by a in
 Demonstrate
 a distance without physically touching different a one forces.
 2 hrsforceKinds
 Normal Force of ofgravity
 forces string oronrope. Demonstrate
 surface another. an object that lies theondirections
 that
 Normal • force
 Define normal force, , as the the directions
 •surface.
 2 hrs Kinds of forces of each Demonstrate the
 Tension • Define
 Define tension
 normal as
 force,force acting
 , as the in a of the directions
 perpendicular force xerted by a
 string or rope. different forces.of each
 Demonstrate of theof each of
 Tension
 Force of gravity • Define tension as force acting in a string or the different forces.
 Normal surface
 force on an•perpendicular
 object
 Define that
 forcelies force
 of on that
 gravity,exerted , asbythe a different forces.
 Force of gravity rope. the directions
 surface. surface on anby object that, lies on that
 Normal force Define
 ••force Definenormal
 exerted normalforce,the
 force,earth , as
 onthe
 as the
 an of each of the
 perpendicular
 surface.
 perpendicular force
 object. The force of gravity is also
 force exerted by exerted
 a surface by
 on aan object that
 different forces.
 Force of
 • gravity
 Define
 Frictional Force force of
 surface gravity,
 lies on
 on
 known as weight. that
 an , as the
 surface.
 object that lies
 . on that
 Force of gravity •by
 force exerted•surface.DefineDefine
 the force
 earth force
 on ofofangravity,
 gravity, , ,asasthe the force of
 It actsattraction
 vertically downwards.
 exerted
 object. The force forceofexerted byalso the earth on an an object.
 by the earth on
 Thegravity
 force ofisgravity is also known as weight. Discuss
 Frictional Force known as weight. ••object.
 Define The
 forceforce.of of gravity
 gravity, , is also
 asand the
 Differentiate .between mass different ways
 Frictional Force known as vertically
 weight. . an Discuss different ways
 It
 Experiment 2 acts weight.
 vertically
 •force downwards.
 Itexerted
 acts by thedownwards.
 earth on to reduce
 to reduce friction
 Frictional Force It acts
 •object. vertically
 Differentiate
 The force downwards.
 between
 of gravitymassis and
 Discuss
 alsoweight.
 friction using
 using examples in
 •• Define
 Frictional Force
 • Differentiate between
 known asfrictional
 Define frictional
 mass
 weight. andforce, , as
 force, . as theforceways
 the
 different Discuss
 parallel technology.
 to the surface
 • Differentiate that opposes the motion ofexamples
 an in
 Experiment 2 weight. force
 It parallel
 vertically
 actsobject tobetween
 and acts
 thein surface
 downwards.
 mass
 the direction
 that
 to and
 reduce different
 opposite totechnology.
 the
 ways
 Experiment 2 weight.
 opposes theof motion of an object and to reduce
 motion the object. friction usingDiscuss
 Experiment 2 • Define frictional
 ••acts force,
 in ,
 the direction
 Measure the as the
 weight opposite
 of different to the using
 objects friction
 a using
 Differentiate
 •to
 Define between
 frictional force,mass , asxamples
 and the in different ways
 force parallelweight. the
 motion surface
 spring
 of balance.
 the that
 object. examples in
 Experiment 2 technology.
 pieces, etc) to reduce
 opposes the (Materials: ofSpring
 force parallel
 motion tobalances,
 an object the and mass
 surface that
 technology.
 4 hrs Force diagram and free opposes the motion of an object and friction using
 body diagram
 acts in the direction
 • Define
 Measure opposite
 frictional
 the to
 weight the
 force, of , as
 different the
 acts in the direction opposite to the examples in
 motion of theforce object.
 objects using
 parallel a spring
 to the surface balance. that
 Force diagram motion ofthethe object. technology.
 •opposes A force
 (Materials: diagram
 Spring
 motion is thean
 balances,
 of representation
 object mass andof all the Give various
 situations for learners
 • Measure the weightforces acting on the object drawn as arrows.
 acts in theofdirection
 different opposite to the to draw the force
 Free body objects using•motion •aMeasure
 spring the weight of different
 balance.
 In aoffree
 thebody diagram the object is replaced by diagrams and
 object. 24 free
 diagram (Materials: Spring objects using
 a balances,
 point with a allspring
 mass
 the forces balance.
 acting on it as arrows. body diagrams.
 4 hrs Resultant •• (Materials:
 Define the
 Measure theSpring
 resultant
 weight balances,two ormass
 of different
 of more forces as Give various
 the single force which can produce the same situations for
 24
 objects using
 effect a spring
 as two or morebalance.
 forces. learners to calculate
 Equilibrant •(Materials: Spring
 Define the balances,
 equilibrant massthat has the the resultant24and
 as the force
 same magnitude as the resultant but acts in equilibrant of a
 the opposite direction. number of forces.
 24
 Experiment 3 (Formal) • Use spring balances to demonstrate the
 resultant and equilibrant are equal.
 (Materials: Three spring balances, string, etc)
 1 hr Equilibrium of forces in • A body is in equilibrium when the resultant
 one dimension force is zero.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 19
 Guidelines for
Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 TERM 2 GRADE 10
 Moment of a force about a point is defined as Familiarise learners
3 hrs
 Moment of a force • It• is measured as the product of the torque in the
 the turning effect of the force about that point. with the concept of
 (Torque) force and the perpendicular distance field of
 • It is measured as the product of the force and torque in the field of
 from the point to the line of action of
 the perpendicular distance from the point technology .
 to technology.
 the force. the line of action of the force.
 Torque
 Torque = = ..
 SISIunit:
 unit:N.m
 N.m

 •
 • Use Useformula
 the the formula to calculatetorque
 to calculate torque.
 Laws of moments • For a body in equilibrium the sum of the
 clockwise moments about a point must be
 • For a equal
 body toin the
 equilibrium the sum of
 sum of anticlockwise moments
5 hrs
 the clockwise
 about themoments
 same point.about a point
 must
 • be equal to the sum
 Do calculations to show of that the clockwise
 anticlockwise
 momentmoments about
 is equal to the the
 anti-clockwise moment.
 Laws of
 same
 • point.
 Use a meter stick and mass pieces to prove
 5 hrs moments
 the laws of moments.
 Experiment 4 (formal) • Do
 (Materials: Meter sticks,
 calculations massthat
 to show pieces,
 the retort stand
 etc.)
 clockwise moment is equal to the
 Beams anti-clockwise moment.

 Beams •
 • Use aDefine
 meterbeam
 stickasand
 a single
 mass rigid length of material
 pieces
 Experiment 4
 to prove the laws of moments. vertical loads.
 supported horizontally to carry
 (formal) Define Meter
 cantilever as a beam
 Cantilever •(Materials: sticks, masswhere one end is
 fixed and one end is free to move.
 pieces, retort stand etc.)
 Simple supported beams • Define a simple supported beam as a beam
 resting on two supports and the beam being
 free to bend under the action of the forces.
 Shear force • Shear force is the algebraic sum of all the
 Beams external forces perpendicular to the beam on
 • Defineone
 beam asthat
 side of a single
 section.rigid length
 Bending moments of•material supported
 Bending moment horizontally
 is the algebraic to sum of all
 Beams the moments
 carry vertical loads. of the forces on one side of that
 section.
 Conditions of equilibrium • A beam is in equilibrium if it is at rest and obeys
 the simple rules of equilibrium.
 • Define cantilever as a beam where
 Simple Machines
 Cantilever one end is fixed and one end is free
 to move. Use IKS to
 Lever • Define a lever as a simple machine. demonstrate how
4 hrs simple machines are
 Simple supported • Define simple supported beam as a made or used in daily
 beams beam
 • resting on two
 Understand that supports
 machines and the to make life.
 are used
 beam being free to bend under the
 work easier.
 Shear force action of the forces.

 • Shear force is the algebraic sum of
 Bending all the external forces perpendicular
 moments to the beam on one side of that
 section.

 Conditions of • Bending moment is the algebraic
 equilibrium sum of all the moments of the forces
 on one side of that section.

 26
 20 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Guidelines for
 Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 • A Fulcrum is the turning point of the
 lever. (The lever rotates about this
 point)
 Guidelines for
Time Fulcrum
 Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 Types of levers • Type 1, type 2 and type 3.
 Fulcrum • Define a fulcrum as the turning point of the
 Identify different
 lever. types
 (The lever of levers
 rotates used
 about this point)
 in
 •
 daily life.
 Define type 1, type 2 and type 3 levers.
 Types of levers
 Mechanical
 • Identify different types of levers used in daily
 advantage life.
 Mechanical advantage •
 • Define
 Definemechanical
 mechanicaladvantage
 advantage asasthe
 theratio of
 ratio load
 of load to effort.
 to effort.
 Test Test learners’
 learners’
 MA=
 MA= = knowledge of levers
 knowledge of
 • Do calculations using the above formula. levers
 •• Do calculations using the
 Mechanical advantage hasabove
 no unit.
 equation.
 • Determine the mechanical advantage of type
 • Mechanical
 1 lever. advantage has no unit.
 Experiment 5 (Materials: Stick, mass pieces, knife edge etc).
 Energy
 Gravitational
 Experiment potential
 5 •• Determine the mechanical
 Define gravitational potential energy of an
 energy advantage of type
 object as 1 lever.
 the energy it has because of its
 position from
 (Materials: themass
 Stick, surface of the earth.
 pieces, knife
 Experiment66
 Experiment •Eedge etc). =the
 •Determine
 Determine
 = mgh or (Uthe potentialenergy
 potential
 mgh) energyofofan an
7 hrs P
 objectatatdifferent
 differentheights.
 heights.
 object
 Energy • (Materials:
 (Materials: 11kgkgmass
 Do calculations mass
 using piece,
 piece, meter
 meter
 the above equation.
 Gravitational ••stick,
 Define
 stick, gravitational
 retort
 retort stand
 stand
 Determine etc)potential
 theetc)
 potential energyenergy
 of an object at
 potential energy of andifferent
 object heights.
 as the energy it has Guidelinesfor
 Guidelines for
 Time TopicGrade
 Time Experiment
 Topic Grade
 6 10
 10 Content,Concepts
 Content,
 because
 (Materials: Concepts
 1of
 kgitsmass
 position Skills
 &&Skills
 piece, in the stick, retort stand
 meter
 etc) Teachers
 Teachers
 gravitational field.
 Kinetic energy Define
 •••Define kinetic
 kinetic
 Define energy
 energy
 kinetic energy asas
 as the
 the energy
 energy
 the energy of an
 7 hrs ofEofanan object
 object
 object due
 due
 due tototo
 its its
 its motion.
 motion.
 motion.
 P = mgh or (U = mgh)
 Kineticenergy
 Kinetic energy oror
 or(K(K==
 (K )) )
 • Do calculations using the above
 • •Do Do calculations
 Docalculations
 calculations
 • equation. usingthe
 using
 using the above
 theabove
 above equation.
 equation.
 equation.
 Mechanical energy • Define mechanical energy as the sum of the
 gravitational potential energy and kinetic
 energy.
 Mechanical
 Mechanical • •Define
 Definemechanical
 mechanicalenergy
 energyas asthe
 the 27
 energy
 energy •sumofof
 sum Do the
 the gravitational
 gravitational
 calculations using the above equation.
 potential and kineticenergy.
 potential and kinetic energy.

 • •Do
 Docalculations
 calculationsusing
 usingthe
 theabove
 above
 equation.
 equation.

 Matterand
 Matter andMaterials
 Materials
 • •Revise
 Revisethe
 thedifferent
 differentproperties
 propertiesofof
 materials:
 materials:

 Strength,thermal
 Strength, thermalandandelectrical
 electrical
 conductivity,brittle,
 conductivity, brittle,malleable
 malleableoror
 ductile,magnetic
 ductile, magneticorornon-magnetic,
 non-magnetic,
 density(lead/aluminium),
 density (lead/aluminium),melting
 melting
 Classificationofof
 Classification
 pointsand
 points andboiling
 boilingpoints.
 points.
 20hrs
 20 hrs Matter
 Matter
 • •Define
 Defineaapure
 puresubstance
 substanceas
 asaasingle
 single
 Puresubstances
 Pure substances
 CAPS typeofofmaterial
 type material(elements
 (elementsoror TECHNICAL SCIENCES 21
 compounds).
 compounds).
 Elements
 Elements
 • •Define
 Definean
 anelement
 elementas
 asthe
 thesimplest
 simplest
 Guidelines for
Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 Matter and Materials
 Classification of Matter • Revise the different properties of materials:

 Strength, thermal and electrical conductivity,
20 hrs brittle, malleable or ductile, magnetic or non-
 magnetic, density (lead/aluminium), melting
 points and boiling points.

 Pure substances • Define a pure substance as a single type of
 material (elements or compounds).
 Elements • Define an element as the simplest type of a
 pure substance.
 Compounds • Define a compound as a substance made up
 of two or more elements in the exact ratio.
 • Classify substances as pure, compounds or
 elements.
 Naming of compounds • Name compounds using the names of the
 elements from which they are made.
 Cations and anions • Define the terms cation and anion.
 • Identify cations and anions
 Molecular formulae • List the common compound anion, only
 sulphate, carbonate, sulphite, hydroxide
 • Use cations and anions to write formulae.
 • Write the name of a compound when a
 molecular formula is given.
 • Write the molecular formulae when given the
 names of compounds.
 • Use stock notation, like iron II oxide for
 example, to write formulae.
 • Write formulae for binary compounds like
 magnesium oxide.
 • Use suffixes like -ide, -ite and -ate to name
 compounds.
 • Use prefixes like di-, tri- etc to name
 compounds.
 Balancing of equations • Represent reactions in equations and
 balancing of equations.
 • Use suitable examples from technology, like
 the reaction in a catalytic convertor.

 22 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Term 3
 Guidelines for
Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
7 hrs Metals, Metalloids and • Classify substances as metals, metalloids and
 Non-metals non-metals using their properties.
 • Identify their positions on the Periodic Table.
 • Describe metalloids as having mainly non-
 metallic properties.
 • Revise the classification of materials as:
 electrical conductors, semiconductors and
 insulators.
 Electrical conductors, • Give examples of electrical conductors,
 semiconductors and semiconductors and Insulators.
 insulators • Identify the substances and the ‘appliances
 or objects’, which are in common daily use
 in homes and offices, that are specifically
 chosen because of their electrical properties
 (conductors, insulators and semiconductors).
 Experiment 7 • Determine the electrical conductivity of
 different materials.
 (Materials: Battery, ammeter, connecting wires etc.)
 • Classify materials as thermal conductors and
 insulators.
 Thermal conductors • Give examples of materials that are thermal
 and insulators conductors and insulators.
 Experiment 8 (Formal) • Test the insulation ability of polystyrene cups.
 (Materials: Four polystyrene cups, scissors, 500 ml
 beaker, 2 thermometers, Bunsen burner, stop watch
 or clock etc.)
 Magnetic and non- • Classify materials as magnetic and non-
 magnetic materials magnetic.
 • Give examples of materials that are magnetic
 and non-magnetic.
 • Give examples of the use of magnets in our
 daily life.
 Experiment 9 • To determine whether a given material is
 magnetic or non-magnetic.
 (Materials: Bar magnets, different types of metals
 and non-metals etc.)
 Structure of the atom
4 hrs Atomic Number • Define the atomic number of an element as the
 number of protons in the atom.
 Mass Number • Define the mass number as the number of
 protons and neutrons in the atom.
 Isotopes • Define an isotope as atoms with the same
 atomic number but different mass number.
 Periodic Table • Introduce the periodic table.
 Use a periodic table to determine the number of:
 a) protons
 b) electrons
 c) neutrons
 in different elements.

 • State the charge of a proton, neutron and
 electron

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 23
 Electricity
Electrostatics
 • Explain that all materials contain
 positive charges (protons) and Guidelines for
 Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 negative charges (electrons). Teachers
3 hrs Electron Configuration • Give electronic arrangement of the first 20
 Two kinds of
 • Explain that anelements
 object whichin the hasperiodic
 an table using Aufbau
 charge principle (using (↑↓)) notation.
 equal number of electrons and
 Order
 protons is •neutral (noofnetfilling in the different energy levels.
 charge).
 • Differentiate between core electrons and
 valence electrons.
 • Explain that positively charged
 Give spectroscopic electron configuration of
 objects are• electron deficient and
 the first 20 elements in the periodic table using
 negatively charged objects(1shave
 the notation 2
 , 2s2,an
 2p6, 3s2, 3p6, 4s2).
 excess of electrons.
 • Determine the nuclear composition of some of
 the elements found in technology.
 • Describe how objects (insulators)
 Electricity
 Electrostatics
 can be charged by contact (or
 rubbing).
 Two kinds of charge • Explain that all materials contain positive
 3 hrs charges Guidelines
 (protons) and negative for
 charges
Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 (electrons). Teachers
 • theExplain
 • Investigate that of
 two kinds an charges.
 object which has an equal
 Experiment 10 number of electrons and protons is neutral (no
 • Use any of thenet
 following:
 charge).
 • Explain that positively charged objects are
 1. A Perspex rod, a Polythene
 electron deficientrod,
 anda negatively charged
 objects
 woollen cloth, small have an
 pieces ofexcess
 paper.of electrons.
 • Describe how objects (insulators) can be
 2. Van der Graaf generator.
 charged by contact (or rubbing).
 Experiment 103. Gold leaf
 • electroscope.
 Investigate the two kinds of charges.
 • Use any of the following:
4 hrs Charge • The principle of conservation of
 1. A Perspex rod, a Polythene rod, a woollen
 conservation charge states that the net charge of
 cloth, small pieces of paper.
 an isolated system remains constant
 2. Van der Graaf generator.
 during any physical process.
 3. Gold leaf electroscope. Give various
 4 hrs • Apply the• principle
 Charge conservation of conservation situations
 of conservation
 The principle to
 of charge states
 of charge. that the net charge of an calculate the
 isolated system
 remains constant during any physical
 chargeprocess.
 when
 • Apply the principle of conservation
 • Determine the charge of two objects two charges of charge.
 •
 after they touch Determine the charge
 and separate using:of two objects
 touch after
 and they Give various
 touch and separate using: separate. situations to calculate
 the charge when two
 charges touch and
 separate.
 • Use the above equation to solve problems
 • Use the aboveinvolving
 equation to solve
 charges.

 NOTE: This equation is only true for identical 32
 conductors.
 4 hrs Electric circuits • Draw the components of a circuit using Practice drawing
 appropriate circuit symbols. circuits using circuit
 Components of a circuit • Give the meanings of all symbols used. symbols.

 24 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 circuit used. symbols.
 • Give the meanings of all symbols Guidelines for
Time Topic Grade 10 Content,
 used. Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 Guidelines for
Time Current
 Topic Grade 10 •Content,
 Define current,
 Concepts I, as&the rate of flow
 Skills
 of charge. It is measured in Teachers
 Guidelines for
 CurrentTopic Grade 10
 Time • Define (A),
 Ampere current,
 Content,
 which I,Concepts
 as thesame
 is the rate ofasflow
 & Skills
 Teachers
 of charge.per
 Coulomb It isecond.
 measured in
 Current • Define current, I, as the rate of flow of charge.
 Ampere (A), which is the same
 It is measured in as
 Coulomb per second.
 • Calculate the current
 Ampere (A),flowing
 whichusing
 is the same as Coulomb
 the equation per second.
 • Calculate the current flowing using
 the equation
 • Calculate the current flowing using the equation

 • Indicate the direction of the current
 in circuit diagrams
 • (conventional).
 Indicate the direction of the current in circuit
 • Indicate the direction
 diagramsof the current
 (conventional).
 PotentialPotential •inDefine
 circuitpotential
 diagrams
 • (conventional).
 difference
 Define potentialin difference
 terms in terms of work
 difference of work
 difference (terminal pd) done and donecharge.
 and charge.
 Potential pd)
 (terminal • Define potential difference in terms
 difference of work done and charge.
 (terminal pd) Measure the Measure the emf and
 potential difference of
 emf and a cell.
 Emf Emf • emf is the• potential
 Emf isdifference
 the potential difference Measure
 across thethe
 cell
 potential
 across the cell when when no nocurrent
 current is is
 flowing in emf
 the circuit
 and (open
 Emf • emf isinthe difference of a
 flowing thepotential
 circuit difference
 (open
 circuit). circuit). potential
 across the• cell when nodifference
 current between
 is cell.
 Give the emf and potential
 difference of a
 •flowing
 Give thein difference
 the circuit (open
 difference.
 between circuit).
 emf cell.
 and potential emf and pd are measured in volts (V).
 • difference.
 • Give the •difference betweenusing
 Do calculations emfthe above equations.
 Measurement of •and
 emf potential
 and pd
 voltage • aredifference.
 measured
 Draw diagrams in volts
 to show how to measure
 3 hrs (pd)and current(V). voltage and current in a circuit.
 Experiment 11• emf and •pd are measured
 Build an electricin volts
 circuit to measure current
 (V). through a resistor and to measure the voltage
 • Do calculations using the above
 across a resistor; draw diagram of the circuit.
 equations.(Materials: Conducting wire, cells, Voltmeter,
 Measurement of •• Draw
 Do calculations
 diagrams using
 resistor, to show
 Ammeter, the above
 how
 Switch toetc.)
3 hrs voltage (pd) equations.
 measure voltage and current in a
 Measurement
 and current of circuit.
 • Draw diagrams to show how to
3 hrs voltage (pd) measure voltage and current in a
 and current circuit.

 33

 33

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 25
 3 hrs opposition to the flowConducting
 (Materials: of electric wire, cells,
3 hrs Resistance • Resistance
 opposition
 Current. to theisflow defined as the
 of electric
 3 hrs Voltmeter, resistor,
 opposition to the flow of electric Ammeter, Switch
 Current.
 Current. etc.)
 •1 = 1 V.A-1. Term 4
 • 1 = 1 V.A-1. -1
 Electricity • 1 =a 1microscopic
 V.A . Term 4description of
 • Give
 Guidelines for
 Time
 Electricity Topic Grade • Give10 a microscopic
 resistance in terms
 Content, description
 of electrons
 Concepts of
 & Skills
 • Give through
 resistance
 moving ainmicroscopic
 termsa of description
 electrons
 conductor and of Teachers
 Guidelines for
 Time Topic Grade 10
 Resistancemoving Content,
 resistance
 • with Concepts
 in
 Resistance terms &
 of Skills
 electrons
 is defined as the
 collidingthrough a conductor
 the particles and
 of which Teachers
 3 hrs
 Resistance moving
 colliding with
 the •conductorthrough
 opposition
 Resistance a toconductor
 particles
 the(metal) the flow
 of which
 is made
 is defined and
 of electric
 andopposition to the
 as the
 3 hrs the colliding with
 Current.
 conductor
 thereby flow the particles
 (metal)
 transferring
 of electric is madeenergy.
 kinetic ofandwhich
 theCurrent.
 thereby conductor
 transferring (metal)
 kinetic is energy.
 made and
 thereby
 • State
 • and transferring
 • 11 explain
 == 11V.A -1 -1kinetic energy.
 V.Afactors
 . . that affect
 • State
 the resistance of a substance.affectof resistance in
 • and explain
 Give a factors
 microscopic that
 description
 the •resistance
 State• andGiveof
 terms explain
 aaelectrons
 of factors
 microscopic
 substance. moving that affecta conductor
 description
 through of
 the and
 resistance
 resistance colliding
 of a with
 substance.
 in termsfactors the particles
 of electrons of which
 Experiment 12 • Investigate the following
 the conductor (metal) is made and thereby
 that
 Experiment 12 • Investigate
 affect the moving through
 the following
 resistance
 transferring of aafactors
 kinetic
 conductor
 conductor:
 energy. that and
 Experiment 12 affect • Investigate
 colliding the following
 with the factors
 particles ofthat
 which
 •the resistance
 • TemperatureState and of a conductor:
 explain factors that affect the
 affect
 • Temperature
 • Thicknessthe
 the resistance
 conductor
 resistance of a substance.
 of a
 (metal) conductor:
 is made and
 Experiment 12 • Temperature
 • Thickness
 • Length
 • thereby
 Investigate transferring
 the following kinetic
 factorsenergy.
 that affect the
 • Thickness
 • Length
 • Type ofresistance
 materialsof a conductor:
 • Length
 • Type • Temperature
 State
 • of materials
 (Materials: Copper and explain
 and nichrome factors that affect
 • Type
 (Materials:
 wires of
 the materials
 resistance
 Copper
 • of different and of
 Thicknessthicknesses, Cells, a substance.
 nichrome
 wires (Materials:
 •of different
 Voltmeter, Copper
 Ammeter,
 Length thicknesses, and nichrome
 switch Cells,
 etc.)
 4 hrs Experiment
 Resistors in wires
 12
 Voltmeter,
 • Resistors
 •
 of
 • different
 Investigate
 Ammeter,
 Type are of in
 thicknesses,
 materials the
 switch following
 series when they etc.) Cells,
 factors that
4 hrs series in
 Resistors Voltmeter,
 • Resistors affect
 connected
 are (Materials: Ammeter,
 the
 are Copper
 inend resistance
 seriestoand switch
 when
 end such ofetc.)
 they a conductor:
 that
 nichrome wires of different
 4 hrs seriesResistors in are • Resistors
 •
 connected
 thicknesses, are
 Temperature
 end in
 to series
 end when
 such
 the current has only one path throughswitch etc.)
 Cells, Voltmeter, thatthey
 Ammeter,
 4 hrs series are
 Resistors in series theach • connected
 current • Resistors
 Thickness
 has only
 resistor. end
 areoneintoseries
 endwhen
 path such
 through thatare connected
 they
 each the current
 • end
 Lengthhas only one path through
 . resistor. to end such that the current has only one
 each resistor.
 • Type
 path
 . • The same current of materials
 through each resistor.
 flows through
 • The . same
 each (Materials:
 current flows
 resistor. Copperthrough and nichrome
 • The wires
 same
 each •resistor. of different
 current flows thicknesses,
 through Cells,
 The same current flows through each resistor.
 Voltmeter, Ammeter, switch etc.)
 each resistor.
 4 hrs Resistors in • Series•circuits
 Resistors areare calledin series
 potential when they
 series • Series
 are connected circuits are called
 end potential
 to end such dividers.
 that
 • Series
 dividers. circuits are called potential
 • Series
 dividers. the current
 circuits arehas only
 called one path
 potential through
 dividers.each resistor.
 .
 • The same current flows through 34
 each resistor. 34
 34

 • Series circuits are called potential
 dividers.

 34

 26 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 current
 • Set upremains
 a circuitconstant.
 to show that series Teachers
 Guidelines
 resistors
 learners that for
 in as
 Time Experiment
 Topic Grade
 1310 circuits areConcepts
 Content, & Skillswhile
 voltage dividers, Remind
 series
 • (Materials:
 Set up a circuit to
 bulbs orthat
 show
 Light constant. series
 resistors, Teachers
 you add more
 Experiment 13 current remains learners
 Remindthat
 resistance as
 circuits
 batteries,area
 • Set up voltage
 circuit todividers,
 switches, while
 connecting
 show that leads,
 series resistors in
 you add
 increases. more
 learners that as
 current
 ammeters, remains
 circuits constant.
 voltmeters
 are Light
 voltage etc.)
 dividers, while series
 (Materials: bulbs or resistors, resistors
 you addinmore
 current remains constant. resistance Guidelines for
 Time
4 hrs Topic Grade
 Resistors in 10 batteries,
 Content,
 Resistors are
 •(Materials: switches,
 Concepts
 inbulbs & Skills
 connecting
 parallel leads, series
 Light or when they
 resistors, resistors in
 increases. Teachers
 parallel ammeters,
 are connected voltmeters
 to the etc.)
 ame resistance
 series
 Experiment 13 batteries,
 •
 (Materials:switches,
 Set up
 Light
 a connecting leads,
 circuit
 bulbs
 to
 orhas
 show that
 resistors,
 series circuits
 point such that the current increases. Remind learners that
 4 hrs Resistors in ammeters,
 Resistors
 •batteries, are voltage
 voltmeters
 are
 switches, in dividers,
 etc.)
 parallel when
 connecting theycurrentresistance
 while
 leads,
 remains
 as you add more
 parallel different
 are paths
 connected through
 constant.
 to the each
 same increases.resistors in series
4 hrs Resistors in ammeters,
 •resistor.
 Resistors are
 (Materials: voltmeters bulbsetc.)
 in parallel
 Light when
 or theybatteries,
 resistors,
 pointswitches,
 such that the current has resistance increases.
 parallel are connected connecting
 to the sameleads, ammeters, voltmeters
 4 hrs Resistors in • Resistors
 different
 etc.) paths arethrough
 in parallel eachwhen they
 parallel point such
 are connectedthat theto thecurrent has
 4 hrs resistor.
 Resistors in parallel different• paths Resistors
 through aresamein parallel when they are
 each
 point such that
 connected the current
 to the same has point such that the
 resistor.
 • different
 Alternatively,
 paths when
 current haswedifferent
 hrough have
 each two paths through each
 resistors
 resistor. in parallel
 resistor. we can use the
 formula Remind
 • Alternatively, when we have two learners that as
 resistors in parallel we can use the you add more
 • Alternatively, when we have two Remind
 formula resistors
 resistors• in parallel
 Alternatively,
 • Alternatively, when we we canhave
 when use the
 we have
 two
 two learnersinin
 resistors that as learners that
 Remind
 formula parallel we can use the formula Remind
 parallel
 • resistors
 Voltage isinconstant
 parallel we can each
 across use the you add more add more
 as you
 learners
 Remindthat
 resistance as
 formulaconnected in parallel.
 resistor, resistors inresistors in parallel
 you add
 decreases. more resistance decreases.
 learners that as
 parallel
 • Voltage is constant across each resistors
 you addinmore
 resistance
 resistor,
 • connected
 Voltage is inconstant parallel
 parallel.across eachdecreases.
 resistors
 resistor, in
 • Voltage isconnected
 constantinacross parallel.
 each resistance
 resistor, connected in are
 parallel. parallel
 • •Resistors
 Voltage in constant
 is parallel current
 across each decreases.
 resistance
 dividers.
 resistor, connected in parallel.
 • Resistors in parallel are current dividers. decreases.
 • Resistors in parallel are current
 dividers.
 Experiment 14 (Formal)• Resistors
 •
 in parallel are current
 Set up a circuit to show that parallel circuits
 dividers.
 • •Set up a circuit
 Resistors areincurrentto show
 parallel arethat
 dividers, parallel
 while
 current potential difference
 Experiment 14
 (Formal) circuits are
 dividers. current
 remains dividers,
 constant. while
 (Materials:
 potential Light bulbs or resistors, batteries,
 Experiment 14 up difference
 • Setswitches,
 a circuit toremains
 connecting show constant.
 that
 leads, parallel voltmeters
 ammeters,
 (Formal) circuits
 etc.)are current dividers, while
 Experiment 14 • (Materials:
 Set up a circuitLightto show
 bulbs orthat parallel
 resistors,
 potential difference remains constant.
 (Formal) circuits
 batteries,area
 • Set up current
 switches,
 circuit to dividers,
 connecting
 show that while
 leads,
 parallel
 Experiment 14 potential ammeters, difference
 voltmeters remains
 etc.) constant.
 (Formal) circuits are Light
 (Materials: current dividers,
 bulbs while
 or resistors,
 potential difference
 batteries, switches, connecting remains constant.
 leads,
 (Materials: Light bulbs or resistors,
 ammeters, voltmeters etc.)
 batteries,
 (Materials:switches,
 Light bulbs connecting leads,
 or resistors,
 ammeters, voltmeters
 batteries, switches, connecting etc.) leads,
 ammeters, voltmeters etc.)

 35

 35
 35
 35

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 27
 Heat and Thermodynamics
 Guidelines for
Time Topic Grade 10 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
1 hr Heat and Temperature

 Heat • Define heat as a form of energy.

 SI unit of heat is joule (J).

 Temperature • Temperature is an indication of how hot or cold
 a body is.

 SI unit of temperature is kelvin (K).

 • Temperature is measured with a thermometer
 in degree Celsius ().
2 hrs Different types of • Alcohol thermometer, Mercury thermometer, Use a mercury
 thermometers Thermoelectric thermometer. thermometer
 to measure the
 • Give the application of thermometers in temperature of the
 technology. following substances:
 (a) ice water
 (b) tap water
 (c) boiling water.
3 hrs Celsius scale • Celsius scale is used to measure temperature
 for general purposes. Fahrenheit (not for
 • The Kelvin scale is used for thermodynamical assessment but for
 Kelvin scale calculations. enrichment only).
 T = t+273

 T is the temperature in kelvin.
 t is the temperature in degree Celsius.

 • Use the above equation to convert temperature
 from Celsius to Kelvin.

 Experiment 15 • Measure the melting point of wax.
 (Materials: Paraffin wax, Bunsen burner,
 Thermometer, 500 ml beaker, boiling tube, clamps,
 etc.)

 28 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Sign • Use the Cartesian coordinates Recall that
 conventions system to indicate the directions vectors have
 (+ve X and +ve Y as positive). magnitude and
 TERM 1 GRADE 11 direction.
 • Use compass directions
 MECHANICSto indicate
 the directions. Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 4 hrs • Express the direction using bearing
 Introduction to Mechanics
 by measuring on the north line in the
 Sign conventions clockwise
 • direction
 Use the toCartesian
 the vector.
 coordinates system to
 Recall that vectors
 indicate the directions
 have magnitude and
 • Use the above
 (+ve Xmethods
 and +ve Ytoas positive).
 direction.
 determine
 • the
 Usedirections
 compass ofdirections
 vectors. to indicate the
4 hrs Graphs • Demonstratedirections.
 the direct proportion Recall that
 • Express the direction
 graphs in the context of technology. using bearing line
 straight by
 measuring on the north line in the clockwise
 direction to the vector.
 graphs are
 • Demonstrate the indirect proportion represented by
 • Use the above methods to determine the
 graphs in thedirections
 contextofofvectors.
 technology. y = mx+c and
 4 hrs Graphs •
 hyperbolic
 Demonstrate the direct proportion graphs in Recall that straight
 the context of technology. graphs are line graphs are
 representedrepresented
 by by
 • xy graphs
 Demonstrate the indirect proportion = k. in y = mx+c and
 the context of technology. hyperbolic graphs are
 represented by xy = k.
2 hrs Theorem of • Determine the resultant of two
 2 hrs Pythagoras vectors• acting
 Theorem of Pythagoras perpendicular
 Determine to each
 the resultant Recallacting
 of two vectors theorem
 other using the theorem f
 perpendicular to each other usingof Pythagoras.
 the theorem Recall theorem of
 Pythagoras: of Pythagoras: Pythagoras.

 • Use the theorem of Pythagoras to calculate
 • Use the theorem of Pythagoras
 the resultant of forces, toin the context of
 calculate thetechnology.
 resultant of forces, in
 the context of technology. Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 2 hrs Co-linear vectors • Define co-linear vectors as vectors that have
 37
 the same line of action.
 Co-planar vectors • Define co-planar vectors as vectors that are in
 the same plane.

 • Draw the resultant of two co-linear vectors.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 29
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
8 hrs Resultant of forces in
 two dimensions. Recall the resultant of
 Head-to-tail method forces.
 • Use the head-to-tail method to determine the
 resultant of two vectors at right angles to each
 other.
 Theorem of Pythagoras • Use the theorem of Pythagoras to determine
 the resultant of forces acting at right angles to
 each other.
 Parallelogram law of • The Parallelogram law of forces states that if
 forces two forces acting at a point can be represented
 by the adjacent sides of a parallelogram both
 in magnitude and direction, then the diagonal
 from the point gives the resultant of the two
 forces.
 • Use the parallelogram law to determine the
 resultant of two forces acting at an angle to
 each other.
 • Using scale drawing (Do not do calculations
 involving the resultant.)
 Experiment 1 • Use the parallelogram of forces to:
 (formal) a) Determine the resultant of two forces
 acting on a point.
 b) Determine the weight of a given body.
 (Materials: Force board with two pulleys, mass
 pieces, pins, sheet of paper,
 components forcelight strings
 into etc.)
 its parallel and calculations.
6 hrs Resolution of forces
 components • Given
 force ainto
 force
 its Fparallel
 acting at
 and an angle
 perpendicular to the Do
 components scale drawing and
 calculations.
 into components horizontal (Rectangular
 axis, resolve the force intocomponents).
 its parallel calculations.
 perpendicular components
 (Rectangular
 and perpendicular components).
 components (Rectangular
 6 hrs Frictional forces
 components). • Define frictional force as the force
6 hrs 6Frictional
 hrs Frictional
 forces forces
 • • Define
 Define that
 frictional
 frictional force as opposes
 force as the
 the force the
 that motion of an object.
 force
 opposes
 thatmotion
 the opposesof an the motion of an object.
 object.
 Static frictional • The static (limiting) frictional force Recall the
 Static frictional force •
 force The static (limiting) acts frictional
 between force
 the Recall the
 actsurfaces
 two normal normal force.
 when
 Static frictional • The static (limiting) frictional force Recall the
 force.
 force between the two the
 acts between surfaces
 thetwo when
 object is the
 surfaces object
 whenis Itnormal
 stationary. is givenforce.
 by
 Kinetic frictional force stationary. It is given by
 the object is stationary. It is given by
 Kinetic frictional
 Kinetic frictionalforce • The kinetic (dynamic) frictional
 force • • The kinetic (dynamic)
 The kinetic force frictional
 (dynamic) acts between
 frictional the two surfaces
 force acts
 force acts
 between the between whenthe
 two surfaces the object
 two
 when is moving.
 surfaces
 the object is It is given
 when the
 moving. It is object byis moving. It is given
 given by
 by
 • Use the above equation to solve problems
 • Use the above equation to solve
 involving frictional problems
 forces.
 • Useplane
 (No inclined the above
 problems) equationinvolving
 to solve frictional forces.
 problems involving (No inclined
 frictionalplane forces. problems)
 Experiment 2 a) (No inclined
 Determine plane between
 the relation problems) the force of
 limiting friction anda) theDetermine
 normal force. the relation between
 Experiment
 b) Determine 2 the coefficient of
 therelation friction
 force ofbetween between
 limiting friction and the
 a) Determine the
 Experiment 2 a block and horizontal
 the Aforce normal
 of limiting
 surface.
 force.
 friction
 (Materials: wooden block, a set of 50 and
 gramthe
 normal force.
 weights, weight box, pan, horizontal table fitted with
 a pulley etc.) b) Determine the coefficient of friction
 b) Determine the between a block
 coefficient and horizontal
 of friction
 surface.
 between a block and horizontal
 surface. (Materials: A wooden block, a set of
 (Materials: A wooden 50 gramblock, weights, a setweight
 of box, pan,
 horizontal
 50 gram weights, weight box, pan, table fitted with a pulley
 30 horizontal tableetc.)
 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 fitted with a pulley
 etc.) Magnetism and Electricity
 Magnetism and Electricity
 Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Magnetism and Electricity
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
8 hrs Magnet • Describe a magnet as an object that has a
 pair of opposite poles, called north and south.
 Even if the object is cut into tiny pieces, each
 piece will still have both a N and a S pole.
 The magnetic field • Define the magnetic field as the region in
 space where another
 • magnet or ferromagnetic material will
 experience a force.
 Poles of permanent • Like magnetic poles repel each other and
 magnet opposite poles attract each other.
 Direction of magnetic field • Use a compass to determine the direction of
 the magnetic field.
 Magnetic field of a bar • Sketch the magnetic field of a bar magnet. Give examples of
 magnet magnets relevant to
 technology.
 Force of a magnet • Predict the behaviour of magnets when they
 are brought close together.
 Properties of magnetic • Discuss the properties of magnetic field lines.
 field lines
 Experiment 3 • Determine the north pole of the earth using a
 bar magnet.
 (Materials: Bar magnet, string, wooden stand, etc.)

 Experiment 4 a) Determine whether a material is a magnetic
 material or a magnet.
 b) Determine the polarity of the magnets.

 (Materials: Bar magnets, magnetic material, string,
 wooden stand, etc.)

 Experiment 5 • Mapping of magnetic field.
 (Materials: Bar magnet, compass needle, drawing
 board, paper, pin, etc.)

 • Compare the magnetic field of the earth to the
 Earth’s magnetic field
 magnetic field of a bar magnet.

 • Explain the difference between the
 geographical North pole and the magnetic
 North pole of the earth.

 • Give examples of phenomena that are affected
 by earth’s magnetic field e.g. Aurora Borealis
 (Northern Lights) & magnetic storms.

 • Discuss qualitatively how the earth’s magnetic
 field provides protection from solar winds.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 31
 TERM 2 GRADE 11
WAVES AND SOUND
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
4 hrs Pulses • Define a pulse as a single disturbance in a
 medium.
 Transverse pulses • Define a transverse pulse as a pulse in which
 the particles of the medium vibrate at right
 angles to the direction of propagation of the
 pulse.
 Longitudinal pulses • Define a longitudinal pulse as a pulse in which
 the particles of the medium vibrate parallel to
 the direction of propagation of the pulse.
 Experiment 6 • Observe the motion of a single pulse travelling
 along a long, soft spring or a heavy rope.
 (Materials: Slinky spring, rope etc.)

3 hrs Waves • Define a wave as a succession of pulses.
 Transverse wave • Define a transverse wave as a wave in which
 rest (equilibrium) position.
 the particles of the medium vibrate at right
 angles to the direction of propagation of the
 wave.
 Crest • • Define
 Draw theatransverse.
 crest as the uppermost
 Longitudinal wave • point on a transverse
 Define a longitudinal wave.
 wave as a wave in which
 the particles of the medium vibrate parallel to
 Trough • Define a trough
 the direction as the lowermost
 of propagation of the wave.
 • point
 Drawonthealongitudinal
 transverse wave.
 wave.
 Wave Terminology
 Amplitude
 Points in phase • • Define
 Define points in phase
 amplitude as astheany two
 maximum
 points that are in the same state
 displacement of a particle from of
 its rest
8 hrs (equilibrium)
 vibration. position.
 Crest • Define a crest as the uppermost point on a
 transverse wave.
 Wavelength • Define wavelength ( as the
 Trough • Define a trough as the lowermost point on a
 distance between two successive
 transverse wave.
 points in phase.
 Points in phase • Define points in phase as any two points that
 SIare
 unit: m same state of vibration.
 in the
 Wavelength • Define wavelength (as the distance between
 Period • Draw and label
 two successive transverse
 points in phase. and
 longitudinal
 SI unit: m waves.
 • Draw and label transverse and longitudinal
 Frequency • Define
 waves. the period (T) as the time
 Period • taken
 Defineto the
 complete oneaswave.
 period (T) the time taken to
 SIcomplete
 unit: s one wave.
 SI unit: s
 Relationship • Define frequency (f) as the number
 Frequency
 between period • ofDefine
 wavesfrequency (f) as the number of waves
 per second.
 per second.
 and frequency SISIunit:
 unit:hertz (Hz)
 hertz (Hz)
 -1
 Relationship between Note:
 Note: 1 1Hz
 1 Hz = s-1 = 1 s
 period and frequency
 • • T=
 T=
 Use the
 •
 • Use the above
 aboveequation
 equationto tosolve problems
 solve
 involving period and frequency in the content
 problems involving period and
 of technology.
 frequency in the content of
 technology.
 Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 32 • Define POLICY
 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT wave speed as the(CAPS)
 STATEMENT distance
 Wave speed travelled by the wave in one second.
 • Use theinvolving
 problems
 problems above equation
 involving period
 periodand to
 andsolve
 problems
 frequency
 frequencyin involving
 inthe period
 thecontent
 contentof of and
 frequency
 technology.
 technology. in the content of
 technology. Guidelines
 Guidelinesforfor
 Time
 Time Topics
 TopicsGrade
 Grade11
 11 Content,
 Content,Concepts
 Concepts&&Skills Skills Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills Teachers
 Teachers
 Guidelines for
 Teachers
Time Topics Grade 11 ••Content,
 Define Concepts
 Definewave
 wave speed& Skills
 speed as
 asthe
 thedistance
 distance Teachers
 Wavespeed
 Wave speed • Define
 travelled
 travelled wave
 by
 bythethespeed
 wave
 wave as
 in the
 inone distance
 onesecond.
 second.
 Wave
 Wavespeed
 speed • Define wave speed as the distance travelled by
 travelled
 the wave inby the
 one wave in one second.
 second.
 vv==
 vv =
 or
 or
 or
 or
 vvv=== or
 or vv
 or v === ff
 v = or v = f
 • Use the above equations to solve problems
 ••involving
 Use
 Usethe above
 thespeed,
 above equations
 equations
 wavelength to
 and solve
 tofrequency,
 solve
 •distance,
 Use thetime,
 problems
 problems above
 involvingequations
 involving
 in the speed, to solve
 speed,of technology.
 content
 problems involving
 wavelength
 wavelength and speed, distance,
 andfrequency,
 frequency, distance,
 wavelength and frequency, distance,
 Superposition of waves • Define the superposition as the algebraic sum
5 hrs 42
 42
 of the amplitudes of the waves that meet at the
 same point simultaneously. 42
 Constructive interference • Define constructive interference as the
 superposition of the two waves which are in
 phase.
 Destructive interference • Define destructive interference as the
 superposition of the two waves which are out
 of phase.
 • Demonstrate the phenomenon of constructive
 and destructive interference using transverse
 wave pulses.
 Experiment 7 • Use a ripple tank to demonstrate constructive
 and destructive interference of two pulses.

 (Materials: Ripple tank apparatus)

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 33
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
8 hrs Sound waves • Sound waves are longitudinal waves. Demonstration:
 Speed of sound in • Investigate the speed of sound waves in Make sound using
 different media different mediums (gas, liquid or solid). a vuvuzela, string,
 • tuning-fork, loud-
 Reflection of sound • Define the reflection of sound waves as the speaker, drum-head.
 bouncing back of the wave from a surface.
 Echo Demonstrate that
 • Define an echo as the reflection of a sound sound needs a
 wave. material medium (air)
 Experiment 8 (formal) • Determine the speed of sound in air. to propagate.
 (Materials: Tuning forks, rubber hammer, meter
 stick, etc.)
 Pitch • Define pitch as a measure of how high or low
 a note is.
4 hrs • Frequency of sound determines its pitch. The
 higher the frequency, the higher the pitch.
 Loudness • Loudness is determined by the amplitude of
 the sound.
 • The higher the amplitude, the louder sound.
 • Use wave patterns to demonstrate pitch and
 loudness.
 Range of sound • Infrasound: frequencies less than 20 Hz.
 frequencies • Audible sound: frequencies from 20 Hz to
 20 000 Hz.
 • Ultrasound: frequencies greater than
 20 000Hz.
 • Application of infrasound and ultrasound
 related to technology.
 Experiment 9 (formal) • Determine the difference between pitch and
 loudness using an oscilloscope.
 (Materials: Oscilloscope, function generator, loud-
 speaker, etc)

 34 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 generator, loud-speaker, etc)

 TERM 3 GRADE 11
 Electricity and Magnetism
Electrostatics TERM 3 GRADE 11
 Electricity and Magnetism Guidelines for
TimeElectrostatics
 Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 11 • Coulomb’s LawConcepts
 Content, states that the force
 & Skills
 Teachers
 of attraction or repulsion between
4 hrs Coulomb’s
 Coulomb’s Law Law two point Coulomb’s
 • charges Law states that the force of
 is directly
 attraction or repulsion between two point
 proportional to the product
 charges of proportional
 is directly their to the product
 4 hrs
 charges and inversely proportional
 of their charges to proportional to
 and inversely
 the square ofthethesquare
 distance between
 of the distance between the two
 charges.
 the two charges.

 • Use the
 • above
 Use equation
 the above to calculate
 equation to calculate the force
 the force andand
 charge.
 charge.

6 hrs Electric fieldfield
 Electric Define the electric
 • Define•the electric field as afield as a region of space in
 region
 which an electric charge experiences a force.
 of space in which an electric charge
 6 hrs experiences a force.

 • •Use
 Usethe
 the above
 above equation
 equation to calculate
 to calculate the force,
 the force,
 charge andcharge and electric field.
 electric field. 44
 Electric field lines
 • The direction of the electric field at a point is
 •the
 The direction
 direction that of the electric
 a positive field at
 test charge (+1C)
 awould
 pointmove if placed
 is the at that
 direction point.
 that a positive
 Electric field lines • test
 Drawcharge
 electric (+1C) would move if
 field lines:
 placed
 (a) at thata point.
 Around positive charge
 •(b)
 DrawAround
 electric field lines:
 a negative charge
 (a) Around a positive charge
 (c)
 (b)Between
 Around aa negative
 positive and a positive
 charge
 charge
 (c) Between a positive and a
 (d) Between
 positive achargenegative and a negative
 charge
 (d) Between a negative and a
 (e) Between
 negativea chargepositive and a negative
 charge.
 (e) Between a positive and a
 negative charge.
 Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 • Electric field between parallel
 plates.

 Electric field
 • Do calculation by using the above
 between parallel
 equation.
 plates
 • Discuss the relationship between E,
 V and d.

 • Draw electric lines between two
 Applications of parallel plates.
 electrostatics
 • Discuss application of electrostatics
 related to technology.

 CAPS
 Electric circuits TECHNICAL SCIENCES 35
 8 hrs Ohm’s Law • Ohm’s law states that the current in
 a conductor is directly proportional to
 the potential difference across it, at
 negative charge
 (e) Between a positive and a
 negative charge.
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers Guidelines for
 • Electric field between parallel Teachers
 Electric field between
 plates. • Electric field between parallel plates.
 parallel plates

 Electric field
 • Do calculation
 • bycalculation
 Do using thebyabove
 using the above equation.
 between parallel
 equation. • Discuss the relationship between E, V and d.
 plates
 • Draw electric lines between two parallel plates.
 Applications of • Discuss •the relationship between
 Discuss application E,
 of electrostatics related to
 electrostatics V and d. technology.
 Electric circuits
 Ohm’s Law • Draw electric
 • lines
 Ohm’sbetween twothe current in a conductor
 law states that
 8 hrs
 Applications of parallel plates. is directly proportional to the potential
 difference across it, at constant temperature.
 electrostatics V= IR
 • Discuss application of electrostatics
 Use the above equation to do calculations
 related to •technology.
 (include graphical calculations).
 Experiment 10 (formal) • Determine the resistance of an unknown
 resistor.
Electric circuits (Materials: Battery, ammeter, voltmeter, a resistance
8 hrs Ohm’s Law • Ohm’s law states
 wire, thatkey,
 Rheostat, the connecting
 current inwires etc.)
 Ohmic and non-aOhmic
 conductor
 • is directly proportional
 Any conductor that obeysto Ohm’s law is called
 conductors the potential difference
 an Ohmic across it, at
 conductor.
 constant temperature.
 • Give examples of Ohmic conductors.
 V= IR • A conductor that does not obey Ohm’s law is
 called non-Ohmic conductor.
 • Use the above
 • equation
 Give to of
 examples donon-Ohmic conductors.
 Experiment 10 11 calculations
 Experiment • (include
 Obtain graphical
 current and voltage data for a piece
 (formal) calculations). of copper wire and semi-conductor and
 determine which one obeys Ohm’s law.
 Ohmic and non- • Determine the resistance of an
 (Materials: Copper wire, semiconductor connecting
 wires, ammeter and voltmeter etc.)
 6 hrs Circuit calculations • Use series and parallel resistors in combination45
 with Ohm’s law.

 Emf • Emf is defined as the potential difference
 across a cell when the circuit is open.
 3 hrs Internal resistance • Internal resistance is defined as the resistance
 inside the cell when current flows through it.
 (No calculation needed)

 Experiment 12 • Determine the internal resistance of a battery.
 (Materials: Battery, multimeter, connecting wires,
 switch, etc.)

 36 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 required to increase the temperature
 of 1 kg of the substance by 1 or
 Heat capacity 1K. Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 11 SI unit: Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 • Define the Heatheat capacity (C) of a
 and Thermodynamics
 4 hrs Heat
 substance as the amount of heat
 Specific heat capacityrequired
 required
 •
 to increase
 to increase
 Define
 the temperature
 the specific the temperature
 capacity (c) of a substance
 of therequired
 of whole
 1 kgas to increase
 ofsubstance bythe 1 temperature
 or11 K.
 the amount of heatby
 the substance
 required to increase
 required orto the temperature
 increase the
 Heat capacity SI of
 unit:
 1K. 1 kg of the
 temperature substance by 1
 of 1 kg of the substance by
 of 1 kg of the or
 substance by 1 1 or
 Heat capacity Heat 1K.
 • Ccapacity
 =
 SI cm
 unit:or 1K. 1K.
 where•SISI unit:
 m unit:
 Define is the themass heat of a substance.
 capacity
 SI unit: (C) of a
 Heat capacity •Define
 •substance theasheat
 Define the
 the
 • capacity
 heat capacity
 amount
 Define the of (C) ofa aGuidelines
 ofcapacity
 (C)heat
 heat (C) of afor
 substance
Time Topics Grade 11 Content, substance Concepts
 as the as the
 amount & Skills
 amount
 of heat of heat
 required to increase the
 required to increase
 temperature
 substance
 of
 thewhole
 the
 temperature
 as the amount
 substance
 Teachers
 by
 of
 1or
 heat
 1
 required
 of the whole to increase
 substance
 required thetoby temperature
 1
 increaseor 1 K.
 the temperature
 • Use the above K. equation to do
 ofSIthe
 SI unit: whole substance of the whole by substance
 1 or 1 K. by 1 or 1 K.
 calculations. unit:
 Practical •SI•Cunit: = cmC = cm SI unit:
 •whereC = cm
 where m is isthe
 the•mass
 mass
 C =ofcm aofsubstance.
 a substance.
 application of heat • Discuss practical application of heat
 where m is the mass mofisa the
 whereequation substance.
 mass of a Guidelines
 substance. for
 capacity capacity • in Use technology.
 the above to do calculations.
 Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills Guidelines for
 Time Practical
 Topics GradeTopics
 11 Content, Concepts & Skills Teachers Guidelines for
 Time
 application of Grade
 • 11
 Discuss Content,
 practical Concepts
 application of &
 heat Skills
 Teachers
 capacity
4 hrs Law of capacity
 heat • Law• Use of conservation
 the above equation of heat states to do Teachers
 •theUse in technology.
 the above equation to do
 conservation of that calculations.
 amount of•heat lost equals
 Use the above equation to do
 4 hrs heatLaw of conservation of •
 calculations.
 the amount Law
 of heatof conservation
 gained, when of heatno states that the
 Practical
 heat calculations.
 amount of heat lost equals the amount of heat
 Practical of Practical
 application heat•isDiscuss
 heat lost.gained, practical application
 when no heat is lost.of heat
 application
 capacity of heat • Discuss
 capacity
 application of heat inpractical
 technology.
 • Discussapplication
 practical heat
 of application of heat
 capacity •
 capacity capacity
 Amount • of in
 heat
 Amount technology.
 lost or gained
 capacity in technology.
 of heat lost or is
 gained is given by:
 4 hrs Law of given• Law by: Qof Q== mc
 mc
 conservation of heat states
 4 hrs conservation
 Law of of •
 that Law the
 4 hrs Law of SI unit of specific of conservation
 amount of
 • Law heat
 of of heatequals
 lost
 conservation states of heat states
 conservation of thatof
 SI unit the amount
 specific heatheat
 of he
 heatcapacity:
 capacity: lostwhen Jkg
 equals K .
 -1 -1
 heat the
 conservation
 -1 -1
 amount
 of of heat
 that gained,
 amount of no lost equals
 heat
 heat
 Experiment 13 heat the
 Jkg heatK .amountis lost. oftheheat gained,ofwhen no
 • Do calculations using the above equation.when no
 amount heat gained,
 heat is lost. heat is lost. Determine heat
 • Do•calculations
 •Amount of using
 heat the
 lost or above
 gained
 Determine the heat capacity of a solid. is capacity of a liquid.
 Experiment 13 •
 equation.
 givenAmount of heat
 by: QCalorimeter,
 (Materials: = •mc lost
 Amount or gained
 of heat lost
 thermometer, is Determine
 or gained
 balance, heat
 lead is(Informal)
 given by: Q
 or sand, water etc.) = mc
 given by: Q = mc capacity of a
 5 hrs Thermodynamics • Determine SI
 • unitInof the heat capacity
 specific
 thermodynamics heatwe of awith theliquid.
 capacity:
 deal processes
 Experiment 13 solid. SI
 Jkg-1K-1.unit
 -1 -1 of specific
 involving heat, heat
 work capacity:
 and
 SI unit of specific energy.heat (Informal)
 capacity:
 Experiment 13
 Terminologies Jkg
 (Materials:
 Experiment 13 K .
 Calorimeter, -1 -1
 Jkg K .
 Thermodynamic system thermometer,
 • •Do calculations
 Define balance, lead the
 using
 thermodynamic or system
 sand,
 aboveas a portion of
 water • Do
 etc.)
 equation. calculations
 matter. E.g. using
 Gas the
 enclosed
 • Do calculations above
 inside
 usinga the cylinder,
 Determine
 above heat
 fitted with a piston.
5 hrs Thermodynamics • In thermodynamics
 Surrounding
 equation. we
 equation. deal with the capacity of heat
 Determine a Determine heat
 processes•
 • Determine Define
 involving the
 the surrounding
 heat,
 heat as
 work andof a
 capacity anything capacity of a capacity of a
 outside
 liquid.
 • Determine the system the whichcapacity
 heat has someofbearing a on the
 liquid.
 Terminologies energy.
 solid. behaviour • Determine
 of the system.the heat capacity (Informal)
 of liquid.
 Open system
 solid.
 (Materials: Calorimeter,
 solid. (Informal) (Informal)
 • Define an open system as a system which
 Thermodynamic • Define(Materials:
 thermodynamic
 thermometer, Calorimeter,
 can exchange balance, system
 (Materials:
 matter lead as a
 or energy
 sand, with the
 Calorimeter,
 and
 system thermometer,
 portion
 water of matter.
 etc.)
 surroundings. balance,
 E.g. lead balance,
 Gas enclosed
 thermometer, or sand, lead or sand,
 5 hrs Thermodynamics •water
 inside etc.) fitted
 Ina thermodynamics
 cylinder, waterwith wea deal
 etc.) piston. with the
 5 hrs Thermodynamics
 5 hrs Thermodynamics • In thermodynamics
 processes involving we
 heat, work
 • In thermodynamics deal with
 andthe we deal with the
 Surrounding
 Terminologies • processes
 Define
 energy. the involving
 surrounding heat,
 as work
 anything and
 processes involving heat, work and
 TerminologiesTerminologies energy.
 outside the systemenergy. which has some
 Thermodynamic bearing • Define on the behaviour of the
 thermodynamic system as a
 Thermodynamic
 system • Define
 portion of matter.
 Thermodynamic thermodynamic E.g. Gas
 • Define system
 enclosed
 thermodynamic as a system as a
 system portion
 systeminside a cylinder, of matter. E.g. Gas
 fittedofwith
 portion enclosed
 matter.a piston.
 E.g. Gas enclosed47
 inside a cylinder, fitted with
 inside a cylinder, a piston.
 fitted with a piston.
 Surrounding • Define the surrounding as anything
 Surrounding Surrounding • Definethe
 outside thesystem
 surrounding
 • Define which theas has anything
 some as anything
 surrounding
 outside the
 bearing on theoutside system which
 behaviour of thesome
 has
 the system which has some
 bearing on thebearing behaviour of the
 on the behaviour of the
 47
 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 47 37
 47
 1K.
 substance 1 kg as of the substance
 amount of heat
 SIofunit: by 1 or
 Heat capacity required
 required required
 torequired
 increase
 to1K. increase
 to to increase
 the temperature
 increasethe the temperature
 the temperature
 temperature
 • Define the heat capacity (C) of a
 of 1 ofkg 1of
 of kgthe
 1of
 of kg
 the SIofwhole
 the
 substance the
 substance
 unit: substance
 by 1 by or
 substance 1byby1or1 oror 1 K.
 substance as the amount of heat
 HeatHeat
 capacity
 Heat
 capacity
 capacity1K. 1K. 1K. SI unit: • Definetothe heat capacity (C) of a
 required increase the temperature
 SI unit:
 SI unit:
 SI •unit: C substance
 = cm as the amount
 Time Topics Grade•11 of the whole
 Content, Concepts substance by 1of heat or 1 K. Guidelines for
 Define
 • Define
 •theDefine
 whereheat
 the quired
 the
 heat
 mcapacityheat
 is capacity
 the to (C)&of
 capacity
 mass
 increase Skills
 (C)ofa a(C)
 ofthe aof
 substance. a
 temperature Teachers
 SI unit:
 Closed system substance
 substance substance
 as
 • the
 ofasthe the
 Defineaswhole
 amount the
 amount
 a closedheat
 amount
 ofsubstance heat
 ofsystem of heat byas 1a or
 system 1 Guidelines
 K.which for
 Time Topics Grade 11 • C = cm
 Content, Concepts & Skills
 required
 required
 required
 to increase
 toSIincrease
 to
 unit:
 can increase
 the temperature
 the the temperature
 temperature Teachers
 where mexchange
 is the mass energy ofonly, not matter, with
 a substance. the
 of the ofwhole
 the
 of •thewholesubstance
 Use whole
 • C substance
 the= above substance
 surroundings. by 1
 cm equation to do by 1
 or by 1 1K.
 or 1 orK. 1 K.
 Guidelines for
 Time Isolated system
 Topics SI unit:
 Grade SI 11
 unit:
 SI calculations.
 unit:
 •Content,
 where Define mConcepts
 is
 anthe mass
 isolated & Skills
 of a ubstance.
 system as a system
 • C= • cm
 C•= C cm = cmwhich is not influenced by its surroundings. Teachers
 Practical Guidelines for
 Time TopicswhereGrade
 where
 m 11
 is
 where m • is
 the Content,
 Use the
 mass
 m (No
 is the mass
 theexchange
 of aboveaConcepts
 mass equation
 substance.
 of a ofof
 substance.
 a heat& Skills
 substance. or
 to do energy with the
 application of heat • Discuss practical application of heat
 surroundings). Teachers
 calculations. GuidelinesGuidelines
 Guidelines
 for for for
TimeTime Time
 Topics
 Topics capacity
 Grade
 Topics Grade
 11
 Grade
 Thermodynamic Content,
 11Content,
 Content,
 11 variables capacity
 Concepts • Use
 • Concepts The in the
 Concepts
 & technology.
 above
 Skills
 thermal & Skills& equation
 tate Skills
 of a ystem to isdo defined by its
 Practical Teachers Teachers
 Teachers
 or co-ordinates
 application of heat • Discuss calculations.
 temperature (T), pressure (P)
 practical application
 and
 of
 volume
 heat
 (V).
 4 hrs LawPractical
 of • Use• Use
 the• Useabove
 •theLaw the
 above These
 equation
 of above quantities
 equation
 conservation to doto are
 equation do
 of toheatcalled
 do states thermodynamic
 capacity capacity variables. in technology.
 conservation calculations.
 application ofcalculations.
 calculations.
 of heat that •the Discussamount of heatapplication
 practical lost equalsof heat
 Practical
 Practical
 Practical
 heat capacity the amount
 capacity of in heat gained,
 technology. when no
 4 hrsInternal
 Law energy
 of of a •• Law of conservation
 Define internal energy of heatof a states thermodynamic
 application
 application
 application of heat
 of heat
 thermodynamic of• heat
 Discuss
 • Discuss
 system. heatpractical
 practical
 • Discuss practical
 issystem application
 lost. application
 application
 of heatofof heatof heatand potential
 conservation of that the amount as the of
 sum heat lost
 the equals
 kinetic
 capacity
 capacity capacity
 4 hrs Law ofcapacity capacity
 capacity
 in technology.
 in• technology.
 Lawin technology.
 energies of conservation
 of all thegained,
 moleculesof heat states
 of the system.
 heat the amount of heat when no
 conservation
 First Law of of • •Amount that The
 heat is lost. heof
 first heat
 amount
 law lost
 of of orheat gained
 thermodynamics lost is
 equals
 states that if
4 hrs4 hrs
 4Law
 hrsLaw
 of Law
 of ofheat • Law
 Thermodynamics • Law given
 Law
 of•conservation of by:
 of conservation Q
 conservation
 heat =
 of
 energy mc
 heat of
 the amount heat gained, when no used
 Q of
 states
 heat
 is heatstates
 given states
 to system, it is
 conservation
 conservation
 conservation of of that of that
 the that
 amount
 the the amount
 heatofin heat
 amount isoflost.
 two heat
 lost
 ways:of heat equals
 lost lost equals equals
 • Amount of
 In heat lost the
 increasing or gained
 internal is
 heatheatheat the amount amount
 the the SIofunit
 amount heat (i)
 ofofheat specific
 gained,
 of heatgained, heat
 when
 gained, when capacity:
 no when no noenergy of the
 given -1 by: Q = mc( U)
 system
 Experiment heat13heat
 is lost.
 heatisJkg is-1•K
 lost. lost.
 Amount.
 (ii) In ofdoingheat work lost or gained
 against external is
 given by:
 SI unit of pressure. Q = mc
 specific (heat W). capacity:
 • Amount
 • Amount • Do
 • Amount
 of heat ofcalculations
 -1heat
 lost
 of-1 heator
 lostgainedorusing
 lost gained
 orisgainedtheisabove is
 Experiment 13 Jkg K .
 givengiven
 by:givenQequation.
 by:•= mc Q SI=unit
 by: QQmc =
 = of mcU+specific
 W heat capacity: Determine heat
 Experiment 13 •• Do JkgUse -1 -1
 K the . aboveusing equation to calculate capacity
 the of a
 calculations the above
 SI unit
 SI of
 unit • unit
 Determine heatheat
 of specific
 of specific
 SIspecific internal the
 capacity:
 heat
 energy, capacity: of a
 capacity:
 work done and the amount liquid.
 of
 -1-1equation. Determine heat
 Experiment
 Experiment
 Experiment
 13 13 Jkg 13 -1Jkg
 K-1.-1Jkg . K•-1Do
 Ksolid. . heat supplied.
 calculations using the above (Informal) capacity of a
 (Materials:
 equation. Calorimeter, Determine heat
 Working substance • Determine
 Define working the heat capacity of a liquid.
 • Do•calculations •
 thermometer, usingusing
 calculations
 Do• calculations
 Do the usingthesubstance
 balance,
 above the
 abovelead above orassand, the substance
 capacity of a Te
 solid.that absorbs heat fromthe source. E.g. Air(Informal) in
 equation.
 equation. water
 equation. • etc.)
 Determine
 petrol and the heat
 diesel engines. capacity Determine heat
 Determine
 Determine
 of a heatheat
 liquid.
 (Materials: Calorimeter, • It absorbs heat from a hot body
 5 hrs Thermodynamics • In thermodynamics solid. we deal capacity withcapacity
 thecapacity
 of a of
 Teachers aof a
 (Informal)
 thermometer, balance, lead or sand, (source), converts a part of it into
 • Determine
 Heat Engine • Determine • Determine
 processes
 the(Materials:
 • It•water
 absorbs
 heat
 the
 Define
 etc.)
 involving
 heat
 capacity
 the
 heatheatheat
 capacity
 Calorimeter,
 engine
 from
 heat,
 of
 capacitya ofawork
 a ashotdevice
 aofliquid.
 aand
 bodywhich
 liquid.liquid.
 converts
 work and rejects the rest to a cold
 Terminologiessolid.solid.solid.energy. thermometer,
 heat energy into balance,
 mechanical lead (Informal)
 or
 work. (Informal)
 sand,(Informal)
 5 hrs Thermodynamics(source), • In thermodynamicsconverts a partwe
 Efficiency ofdeal
 itheat
 into withbody the (sink).
 (Materials:
 Efficiency of heat (Materials:
 engine (Materials:
 •Calorimeter,
 Calorimeter,
 water Calorimeter,
 etc.)
 It absorbs heat from a hot body (source),
 work processes
 and rejects involving
 the
 engine rest heat,to a work
 cold and
 5 hrs Thermodynamicthermometer,
 Thermodynamics • Define
 thermometer,
 thermometer, balance,
 • (sink). thermodynamic
 balance,
 Inconverts balance,
 thermodynamicsleadpart lead
 or of sand,
 or
 lead system
 sand,
 it intowerwork sand,
 dealand as arejects
 with the the Heat converted to work W
 Terminologies
 Efficiency of heat body energy. rest to a coldE.g. bodyGas (sink).
 system water water
 etc.)
 water portion
 etc.)etc.) of matter.
 processes involving heat, work and enclosed Efficiency,= =
 engine Total heat absorbed 1
5 hrs5 hrs
 5Thermodynamics
 hrsThermodynamics
 Thermodynamics • In thermodynamics
 Terminologies Ininside a cylinder,
 thermodynamics
 • In •thermodynamics energy. we
 Heatdeal we fitted
 deal
 we
 withdeal with
 with
 the athe
 with piston.
 the
 Thermodynamic • Define thermodynamic
 converted
 Second law system
 to work
 of W as 1a
 (No calculation on efficiency
 Second law ofprocessesprocessesEfficiency,=
 processes
 involving involving
 Efficiency,= involving
 heat,heat, work heat,
 work
 andwork andand = =
 system
 thermodynamics portion of matter. Total heatE.g.
 thermodynamics
 absorbed Gas enclosed 1 1
 Surrounding
 Terminologies
 Terminologies
 Terminologies energy.
 Thermodynamic energy. • (No
 energy. Define the surrounding
 • calculation
 Define thermodynamic
 on efficiency asof aanything
 system
 heat ofasa aheat engine).
 engine).
 Second law of 1 inside a calculation
 cylinder, fitted with a piston.
 system outside ( Nothe system
 portion of matter. E.g. Gas enclosed which on efficiency
 has some
 thermodynamics 1
 Thermodynamic
 Thermodynamic
 Thermodynamic • Define
 • Define bearing
 •thermodynamic
 Define
 • inside
 heat
 of a• Define It on
 thermodynamic
 thermodynamic behaviour
 theylinder,
 athe
 impossible
 is ngine). system system as
 system
 tofitted
 get aaofas
 withtheaasa apiston.
 continuous • Itsupply of
 is impossible to get a continuous
 Surrounding surrounding
 Refrigerators as anything
 system
 system system portionportion
 of
 portion
 matter.
 of matter.
 ofwork
 E.g.
 matter. E.g.
 GasaE.g.
 from Gas Gas
 enclosed
 body enclosed
 by enclosed
 cooling it to a temperature
 supply of work from a body by
 outside lower the than system
 the lowestwhich of itshas some
 surroundings.
 inside
 Surrounding inside
 a inside
 cylinder,
 a cylinder,
 a cylinder,
 fitted
 is impossible
 • It bearing• Define with
 fitted
 the a
 with
 fitted piston.
 with
 surroundinga piston.
 a piston.
 as anything
 Refrigerators on thetobehaviour get a continuous of the cooling it to a temperature 47 lower than
 supply outside
 of work thefrom system a body which by has some the lowest of its surroundings.
 • It is the reverse of a heat engine.
 Surrounding
 Surrounding • Define
 Surrounding • Define
 •theDefine
 coolingsurrounding
 the the
 surrounding
 bearingit tosurrounding
 aon theanything
 as
 temperature as as anything
 anything
 behaviour lower of than
 the
 Refrigerators outside outside
 the
 outside system
 the
 the• lowest the
 system which
 system
 The ofworking
 which
 has whichhas
 some
 its surroundings. has
 some some
 substance (coolant •e.g. the reverse of 47
 It isliquid a heat engine.
 bearingbearing
 bearing
 on the onbehaviour
 the
 on behaviour
 the behaviour
 of theof the
 ammonia, Freon etc.) absorbs heat from a of the
 cold body (freezer), withengine.
 the help of •anThe
 external 47
 • It is the reverse of a heat working substance (coolant
 agency (compressor), and rejects it to the hot
 body (atmosphere).
 e.g. liquid
 47 ammonia,
 47 47 Freon etc.)
 • The working substance (coolant absorbs heat from a cold body
 e.g. liquid ammonia, Freon etc.) (freezer), with the help of an
 absorbs heat from a cold body external agency (compressor), and
 (freezer), with the help of an rejects it to the hot body
 external agency (compressor), and (atmosphere).
 rejects it to the hot body
 (atmosphere).
 38 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 TERM 4 GRADE 11

 TERM 4 GRADE 11
 TERM 4 GRADE 11
 Chemical Change
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 11 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
8 hrs Oxidation and Reduction • Oxidation is defined as the loss of electrons.

 Oxidation • Give examples of oxidation.
 • Reduction is defined as the gain of electrons.
 Reduction • Give examples of reduction.
6 hrs Oxidizing Agent • An oxidizing agent is defined as a substance
 that undergoes reduction.

 Reducing Agent • A reducing agent is defined as a substance
 that undergoes oxidation.

 Assigning Oxidation • Rules for assigning oxidation numbers.
 Numbers
 • Assign oxidation numbers in various
 molecules.

 Electrolysis • Electrolysis is the decomposition of a
 substance when an electric current is passed
 through it.

 Cathode • Cathode is the electrode where reduction
 takes place.

 Anode • Anode is the electrode where oxidation takes
 place.
 Experiment 15 • Electrolysis of a salt solution.
 (Materials: Carbon electrodes, beaker, copper
 chloride, water, power source, connecting wires,
 switch, etc.)

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 39
 TERM 1 GRADE 12
 MECHANICS
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
13 hrs Newton’s Laws of
 motion

 Newton’s First Law of • State Newton’s first law: An object continues in
 Motion a state of rest oruniform (moving with constant)
 velocity unless it is acted upon by an unbalanced
 (net or resultant) force.
 Inertia • Define inertia as the property of a body to resist
 any change in its state of motion or rest.
 Mass • Define mass as a measure of the inertia of a
 body.
 SI unit is kg.

 • Give examples to illustrate Newton’s first law.
 Acceleration • Define acceleration as the rate of change of
 velocity.
 SI unit is m.s-2
 Recall vector and
 Newton’s Second Law scalars.
 • State Newton’s second law: When a net force,
 of Motion Fnet, is applied to an object of mass, m, it
 accelerates the object in the direction of the net
 force.
 Fnet = ma
 SI unit is N.

 • Use the above equations to solve problems
 involving force, massand acceleration in the
 content of technology. (Do not include pulley
 problems and lift problems).
 Experiment 1 (formal) • Determine the relation between acceleration
 and force for a constant mass.
 (Materials: Mass pieces, Trolleys, string, ticker timer,
 etc.)

 Newton’s Third Law of • State Newton’s third law:
 Motion When object A exerts a force on object B,
 object B simultaneously exerts an oppositely
 directed force of equal magnitude on object A.

 • Give examples to illustrate Newton’s third law,
 using action-reaction pairs.

 Experiment 2 • Show that the action-reaction pairs are equal in
 magnitude and opposite in direction.
 (Materials: Two spring balances, mass pieces, etc).

 40 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SI unit is kg.m.s-1

 • Use the above equations to solve
 problems involving momentum, mass
 Impulse and and velocity,
 SI unit in the
 is kg.m.s -1 content of Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 change in technology. Discuss
 Teachers
 12 hrs momentum
 Momentum • • Use Momentum is defined
 the above equations to solve as the product of massexamples of
 • Impulse
 and velocity.
 problems is the effect of large force impulse in our
 SI unit is involving
 kg.m.s-1 momentum, mass
 Impulse and acting
 p = mv on a body
 and velocity, in -1the content of for a small interval of everyday lives.
 SI unit is-1kg.m.s
 time.
 change in SI unit is •technology.
 kg.m.s
 Use the above equations to solve Discuss
 momentum • problemsUse the involving above equations to
 momentum, mass solve problems examples of
 •Impulse=
 Impulse F
 is the effect of large
 Impulse and• Use theand above
 involving equations
 velocity, in theto
 momentum, solveand
 mass
 content of velocity, in theimpulse in our
 force
 SI
 acting unit is N.s
 onofamomentum,
 body for a small massinterval of Discuss everyday lives.
 change in problemstechnology.
 involving
 content technology. Discuss examples
 Impulse momentum
 and • Impulse
 time.
 and velocity, in the content of is defined as the change in
 • momentum.
 examples
 of impulseofin our
 Impulse and change in
 change in technology. Impulse is the Impulse=
 effect of large force acting on a
 Discuss
 momentum • Impulse is the effect of large force impulse in lives.
 everyday our
 momentum SIbody unitforisaN.s
 Impulse= Fsmall interval of time. examples of
 acting on a body for a small interval of everyday lives.
 • Impulsetime.•SIF unit
 is the=effect
 is N.sof large force impulse in our
 Topics Grade
 acting on • aImpulse
 body
 Impulse for
 is is adefined
 small
 defined as as the
 interval
 the change change
 of in in
 everyday
 momentum. Guidelines
 lives. for
 Time • Content, Concepts & Skills
 12 time. momentum.
 Impulse= F Impulse=
 Teachers
 Impulse=
 •SIUse unit the above
 isisN.s
 N.s equations of impulse
 SISI unitis
 unit
 Impulse= to FF = is definedinvolving
 • •• Impulsesolve problems force, time
 as the change in
 SI unit
 Topics Grade and
 • ismomentum.
 N.s change in momentum in the
 equations of impulse to solveGuidelines for
 Time Use the above
 Content, Impulse=
 Concepts & Skills
 12 • Impulsecontent
 SIisproblems
 defined
 unit
 of involving
 is N.s
 technology.
 as the change force, time in and change inTeachers
 momentum. • momentum
 Use Impulse=
 the in the equations
 above content of technology.
 of impulse
 •F =
 • •
 SI unit istoN.s Force
 Force is
 is defined
 defined
 solve problems involving force, as
 as the
 the rate
 rate of
 of change
 time inGuidelines for
 Topics Grade
 Time change
 Content,
 momentum. in momentum.
 Concepts
 • F = and change in momentum in the & Skills
 12 Teachers
 Topics Grade • FF = theofabove
 content
 Use technology. equations of Guidelines for
 impulse
Time Content, Concepts & Skills
 12 • to Give solveexamples
 problems of involving
 applicationsforce, Teachers
 of impulsetime and
 • Use theand momentum
 Force
 • above is defined
 equations in the context
 as of
 the rate
 of stand,
 impulse road safety.
 of brick,
 (Materials:
 change inRetort
 momentum instring,
 the
 Conservation
 Conservation of of• problems The law of conservation of momentum
 to solve change
 • ticker
 Give examples
 content in
 timer, momentum.
 involving
 of technology.trolley force,
 of applications
 etc.) time of states
 momentummomentumand change that the total linear momentum of an isolated
 impulse=in momentum
 Fsystem and
 remains momentum in the in the
 constant in context and
 magnitude
 content of technology.
 •ofForce
 road isafety.
 direction. defined as the rate of
 10 Work energy • change Explain the in momentum.concepts elastic and inelastic
 Conservation
 • of
 Force is
 hrs and Power • Give examplesrate
 • Fdefined
 The= law
 collision. asof the
 conservation of
 of applications of of
 momentumchange in momentum.
 momentum states thatof the
 •Use
 • impulse Define theand work
 conservationas the
 momentum in total
 product linear
 theofcontext
 momentum theto solve
 Work F= momentum
 problems
 offorce
 roadapplied of
 involving an isolated
 momentum,
 safety. on an object and the system
 in the content of
 Conservation of technology.
 remains
 displacement constant in magnitude
 in the direction ofand force.
 Experiment 3
 momentum • •direction.
 Give examples
 To determine of applications
 if momentum is conserved of during
 Experiment 3 • The
 impulse law
 a collision. and of momentum
 conservationinofthe context
 Conservation of W=F
 momentum statesstring, that brick,
 the
 • Give(Materials:
 examples
 of roadRetort of applications
 safety. stand, of total tickerlinear
 timer,
 momentum • •Explain
 Use
 momentum thethe ofconcepts
 above equation
 aninisolated elastic to solve
 system and
 impulse and
 trolley etc.)momentum the context
 inelastic
 problems collision.
 involving work, forceand and
 10 hrs Work energy and of road safety.•remains
 The lawconstant of conservation in magnitude of
 Power displacement.
 direction. states that the total linear
 Experiment 3 momentum
 Topics Grade • of
 • The lawmomentumUse the conservation
 conservation of of momentum Guidelines for
 Time • to Content, ofasan
 Concepts isolated & system
 Skills
 Work 12
 momentum solve
 Define
 • Explain problems
 work
 the
 thatconcepts
 the involving
 product of
 elastic
 the force applied Teachers
 and
 onstates
 remains
 momentum, an constant
 object in
 theand
 the
 intotal
 magnitude
 the linear
 content displacement
 of
 and in the
 momentum • If
 inelastica force and
 collision.
 of an isolated
 direction.
 direction
 the
 of force. system
 displacement are at
 Experiment 3 technology.
 an angle
 remains constant in magnitude and to each other:
 direction.•• W=F Use
 W=F thethe
 Explain conservation
 concepts of momentum
 elastic
 Experiment 3 •To
 •
 toUse
 • inelasticWorkdetermine
 solve is a
 problems
 thecollision. if
 scalar
 above equationmomentum
 quantity.
 involving isand problems
 to solve
 conserved
 • Explainmomentum,
 the SIconcepts
 unit: work,
 involving during
 joule (J)acontent
 force
 inelastic
 the collision.
 andanddisplacement.
 of
 technology.
 inelastic •collision.
 Use the conservation of momentum
 to• solve
 Explain that no involving
 problems work is done when a 52
 force
 •To
 • Use themomentum, acts
 determine
 conservation at right
 in of angles to
 if momentum
 the momentum
 content of is the
 directioninvolving
 conserved
 to solve technology.
 problems ofduring
 motion. a collision.
 Energy momentum, in the content of
 technology. •To• Define
 determine energy as the capacity
 if momentum is to do
 work. 52
 conserved during a collision.
 •To determine if momentum is
 Conservation of
 conserved • during
 It is a scalar a collision. quantity.
 mechanical SI unit: joule (J) 52
 CAPS energy TECHNICAL SCIENCES
 52
 41
 • The conservation of mechanical
 energy states that the total energy of
 an isolated system is constant.
 •W=F
 If a force and the displacement are at
 •an Use the to
 angle above
 eachequation
 other: to solve
 problems
 W=F involving work, force and
 displacement.
 • Work is a scalar quantity.
 Topics Grade SI unit: joule (J) Guidelines for
 Time Content, Concepts & Skills Guidelines for
Time 12
 Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills Teachers
 Teachers
 • ••IfIfExplain
 force
 aaforce
 that
 and andhe no
 thework is done
 displacement
 displacement
 when
 are at are
 at
 an angle
 force
 an angle
 to each acts toateach
 other: rightother:
 angles to the
 direction
 W=F
 W=F of motion.
 Energy • •Work
 Workis is a scalar
 a scalar quantity.
 quantity.
 •SIDefine
 SI unit:joule
 unit: energy
 joule(J) (J)as the capacity to do
 work.
 • •Explain
 Explain that no work
 that is done
 no work is when
 doneawhen
 force acts
 a at
 right
 Conservation of force angles
 • It is acts scalarto the direction
 quantity. of motion.
 at ight angles to the
 Energy mechanical SI unit: joule
 direction (J)
 of motion.
 • Define energy as the ability to do work.
 energy
 Energy
 • ••ItDefine
 The conservation
 is a scalar energy as the
 quantity.
 of mechanical
 capacity to do
 energy
 work. states
 SI unit: joule (J) that the total energy of
 an isolated system is constant.
 Conservation of
 Conservation of• •TheIt isconservation
 a scalar quantity. of mechanical energy states
 mechanical energy
 Power
 mechanical •SIMunit:
 that =
 the E +
 total
 joule E energy of an isolated system is
 E k p(J)
 energy constant.
 •• The
 Use conservation
 the above equation to solve
 of mechanical
 • ME = Ek + Ep
 problems
 energy statesinvolving
 that thekinetic
 totalenergy,
 energy of
 potential
 an isolated energy
 system and is velocity
 constant. in one
 • Use the above equation to solve problems
 dimension
 involving kinetic only.energy, potential energy and
 Power •velocity
 ME = Eink + oneEpdimension only.
 • Define power as the rate at which
 Power • •work
 Use is
 Define the done.
 power above
 as thequation
 rate at whichto solve
 work is done.
 problems W involving kinetic energy,
 PP =
 potential t energy and velocity in one
 SI
 SI unit: watt
 unit: watt
 dimension (W)(W)
 only.
 • Practical units of power in technology:
 ••(i)Define
 Practical units
 kWpower
 = 1000 as
 of power in
 W the rate at which
 work
 (ii) isHorse
 done.power (hp) = 746W
 W 53
 P=
 • Solvet problems involving work, power and
 SI unit:
 time, watt
 with the(W)
 emphasis on conversions of the
 practical units.
 Power and velocity • •When
 Practical units
 an object of power
 travels in
 at a constant velocity we
 use: P = Fv.
 53
 • Solve problems involving power, force and
 velocity with the emphasis on conversions of the
 practical units.

 Experiment 4 • Determine the power output of an individual.
 (Materials: Sturdy wooden box to step on, meter stick,
 stop watch, bathroom scale etc).

 42 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 6 hrs Elasticity

 Deforming force • A force which changes the shape and size of a
 body is called a deforming force.

 • The force developed inside the body which tries
 to bring the body back into its initial size and
 shape.

 Restoring force • The restoring force is equal and opposite to the
 deforming force applied.

 Elasticity •Elasticity of a body is the property of the body
 by virtue of which the body regains its original
 Topics
 Topics Grade
 Grade Guidelines
 Guidelines for
 forcefor
Time
Time Content, Concepts
 shape& and
 Content, Concepts & Skills
 size when the deforming
 Skills
 is
 12
 12 removed. Teachers
 Teachers
 Perfectly
 Perfectly plastic
 plastic •• A
 A body
 body which
 which does
 does notnot show
 show a a
 body
 body tendency
 tendency
 Perfectly elastic body to regain
 to• regain its original
 its original
 A body shape
 shape
 which regains its original shape and size
 and
 and size
 size when
 when the deforming
 completely
 the deformingwhenforce is
 the deforming
 force is force is removed
 removed.
 removed. is called a perfectly elastic body.
 • Give examples of perfectly elastic bodies.
 Elastic limit
 Elastic •• Give
 Perfectly plastic
 limit bodyexamples
 Give •
 examplesAof perfectly
 ofbody plastic
 which does
 perfectly not show a tendency to regain
 plastic
 bodies.
 bodies. its original shape and size when the deforming
 force is removed.
 Stress
 Stress •• The
 The maximum
 maximum force that can
 that canofbe
 forceexamples be
 • Give perfectly plastic bodies.
 applied to body so that the body
 applied to body so that the body
 Elastic limit regains
 regains its
 its original
 original
 •
 form completely
 Theform completely
 maximum
 on
 force on
 that can be applied to
 removal of the force.
 removal of the force.
 body so that the body regains its original form
 completely on removal of the force.
 •• The
 The internal
 internal restoring
 restoring force
 force per
 per unit
 unit
 Stress • The internal restoring force per unit area of body
 area of body is called
 area of body is called stress.
 stress.
 is called stress.

 Strain
 Strain
 -2
 SI
 SI unit:
 unit: Pa or
 Pa SI N.m
 or unit:
 N.mPa -2
 or N.m-2

 •• Use
 Use the
 the above
 above
 • equation
 equation
 Use to
 to calculate
 the above calculate
 equation to calculate stress, force
 stress, force and area
 and or
 area diameter.
 or diameter.
 stress, force and area or diameter.
 Strain
 •• Define
 Define strain
 • asDefine
 strain astothe
 the ratio
 strainof
 ratio ofaschange in
 the ratio of
 change in change in dimension
 dimension the original dimension.
 dimension toto the
 the original
 original dimension.
 dimension.

 •• Strain
 Strain does
 does not have
 • notStrain
 any
 havedoes unit.
 anynot
 unit.
 have any unit.

 TERM 2
 TERM 2 GRADE
 GRADE 12
 12
Elasticity
Elasticity
 Topics
 Topics Grade
 Grade Guidelines for
 Guidelines for
Time
Time 12 Content,
 Content, Concepts
 Concepts &
 & Skills
 Skills
 12 Teachers
 Teachers
 Hooke’s
 Hooke’s law
 law •• Hooke’s
 Hooke’s law
 law states
 states that,
 that, within
 within the
 the
 limit of elasticity, stress is directly
 limit of elasticity, stress is directly
 proportional
 proportional toto strain.
 CAPS stress strain
 stress strain
 strain. TECHNICAL SCIENCES 43

 =
 =K;
 K; a
 a constant
 constant known
 known asas modulus
 modulus
 of elasticity of the material of the body.
 of elasticity of the material of the body.
 TERM22GRADE
 TERM GRADE12
 12
 Elasticity
 Elasticity
 TERM 2 GRADE 12
 TopicsGrade
 Topics Grade Guidelinesfor
 Guidelines for
 Time
ElasticityTime Content,Concepts
 Content, Concepts&&Skills Skills
 1 hr 1212
 Viscosity • Define viscosity as the property of the Teachers Teachers
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 law
 Hooke’s
 Hooke’s law Content, Concepts
 Hooke’s
 •Hooke’s
 •fluid to oppose law
 law Skills
 &states
 states
 relative that,
 that, within
 within
 motion the
 the
 between Teachers
 Hooke’s law •
 limit
 limit
 the of
 of
 wo elasticity,
 elasticity,
 adjacent stress
 stress
 layers. isis directly
 directly
 Hooke’s law states that, within the limit of
 1 hr Viscosity
 The effect of •proportional
 Define viscosity
 proportional
 elasticity, stresstotois as the proportional
 strain.
 strain.
 directly property oftothe strain.
 fluid to
 stress
 •stress
 temperature on stress oppose
 Discuss train
 strain
 strain relative motion
 the effect of temperature betweenon
 viscosity the two
 viscosity
 == adjacent
 in the
 K;K;aaaconstant
 =K; constant
 constant layers.
 field of
 known
 known
 known technology.
 asmodulus
 as
 as modulusmodulus
 of
 The effect of
 Motor oil on
 temperature •of elasticity
 ofelasticity
 elasticity
 Discuss
 of the
 the ofof thematerial
 material
 the
 effect material
 of
 of the body.
 temperature body.
 thebody.
 ofofthe on
 Unit:
 Unit:
 Unit: Nm
 Nm
 Nm -2or
 -2 -2 Pa
 ororPaPa
 viscosity
 viscosity grades • Discuss
 viscosity in motor
 the oil
 field viscosity
 of technology.grades.
 • Use the above equation to calculate stress,
 •Use
 Usethe
 ••strain theabove
 aboveequation
 equation totocalculate
 calculate
 5 hrs Motor oil
 Hydraulics Hydraulics (fluidofmechanics)
 and Modulus elasticity. is a topic
 viscosity grades• stress,
 •stress,
 Discuss strain
 train
 motor and
 and Modulus
 oilModulus
 viscosity ofof elasticity.
 elasticity.
 grades.
1 hr Viscosity in applied science and engineering
 Define viscosity as the property of the fluid to
 Thrust dealing
 oppose relative with mechanical
 motion between properties of
 the two adjacent
 5 hrs Hydraulics layers.
 • Hydraulics
 liquids. (fluid mechanics) is a topic
 5555
 in• applied
 Define science
 thrust asand the engineering
 normal force
 The effect of • Discuss the effect of temperature on viscosity in
 Thrust
 temperature on viscosity dealing
 exerted withby mechanical
 a liquid at rest properties
 on a given of
 the field of technology.
 liquids.
 surface in contact with it.
 Motor oil Topics
 viscosity Grade
 •
 • Define
 Discuss motor
 thrustoil asviscosity
 the normal grades.
 force Guidelines for
 Time
 grades Content,
 exerted by Concepts
 a liquid at &
 rest Skills
 on a given
 12 Teachers
5 hrs Hydraulics • surface
 Hydraulics in contact
 (fluid mechanics)with it. is a topic in applied
 Pressure •science
 Pressure at a particular
 and engineering dealing point is the
 with mechanical
 Topics Grade thrust acting on the unit area around Guidelines for
 Time Content,
 propertiesConceptsof liquids. & Skills
 Thrust
 12 • that
 Define point.
 thrust as the normal force exerted by a
 Teachers
 Pressure • Pressure
 liquid at restaton Taarust
 particular F pointcontact
 given surface is the with it.
 Pressure =
 Pressure • thrust acting on
 Pressure at a-2particular area the unitA
 pointarea around
 is the thrust acting
 SI
 on unit:
 that point.
 the unit Nm areaor Pascal
 around that(Pa)
 point.
 • Use the above
 Practical unit of Pressure T rust equation F to calculate
 Pressure =
 pressure pressure, thrust
 area and A area.
 -2
 SISIunit:
 unit:Nm Nm-2 or orPascal
 Pascal (Pa) (Pa)
 Practical unit of unit of • • Use
 Practical Use(i)thethe above
 above
 atmosphere equation
 equation to calculate
 to(atm)
 calculate = pressure,
 pressurepressure pressure,
 thrust and thrust
 area.
 1,01 10 Pa and 5area.

 Fluid pressure (ii) bar: 1 bar = 105 Pa
 (i) atmosphere (atm) = 1,01105 Pa
 (i) atmosphere =(atm) =
 (ii) (iii)bar: 1torr: bar =110 torr
 5 Pa
 5 133 Pa
 (iii) torr:1,01
 1 torr =10 133Pa Pa
 Fluid pressure (ii) bar:
 • Fluid pressure is given 1 bar = 105 by Pa the
 Fluid pressure • (iii)pressure
 following
 Fluid torr: is1given
 equation: torr = by133 Pa
 the following equation:
 Pascal’s law P=
 P= •• Use
 Use the theabove aboveequationequation to
 to calculate
 • Fluid
 calculate pressure
 fluid pressure, fluidheight is given
 pressure, by
 and density.heightthe and
 following
 density. equation:
 Pascal’s law • P=Pascal’s • Use the above
 law states that in a equation
 continuous toliquid at
 Pascal’s law
 equilibrium, the pressure applied
 Hydraulic lift calculate
 • Pascal’s fluidlawpressure,
 states that heightin a and point is
 at any
 transmitted equally to other parts of the liquid.
 density.
 continuous liquid at equilibrium, the
 Hydraulic lift • pressure
 Hydraulic lift applied
 is used at any
 to lift point
 heavy is
 loads.
 Hydraulic lift • Pascal’s
 transmitted law states
 equally that
 to other in a parts of the
 • Discuss the use of hydraulics in technology.
 continuous
 liquid. liquid at equilibrium, the
 pressure
 Examples:
 Examples: applied
 car lifts carjacks,
 and at any
 lifts and point
 jacks,
 hydraulic is hydraulic
 brakes, dentist
 transmitted
 Examples:
 chairs•brakes,
 Hydraulicentist
 etc. equally
 car
 lift lifts
 ischairs
 usedto
 and other liftparts
 jacks,
 etc.
 to of the
 hydraulic
 heavy
 • liquid.
 brakes,
 • In
 loads.
 In dentist
 hydraulic
 hydraulic chairs etc.
 lifts: lifts:
 ••In hydraulic
 Discuss thelifts:
 use of hydraulics in
 • Hydraulic
 technology. lift is used to lift heavy
 loads.
 Where
 •Where
 Discuss
 • Use the
 Where the use of
 above hydraulics
 equation in
 to calculate
 • technology.
 • Use
 Usethe
 force, the areaabove
 above and equation
 radius
 equation to of tothecalculate
 calculate pistons.
 force, area 56
 and radius
 force, areaofand the pistons.
 radius of the pistons.
 44 Matter
 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT and STATEMENT
 POLICY Materials(CAPS) 56
 Topics Grade Matter and Materials Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade Content, Concepts & Skills Guidelines
 Time 12 Content, Concepts & Skills Teachers for
 12
 4 hrs Electronic Teachers
 Matter and Materials
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
4 hrs Electronic Properties • A semiconductor is a material which has electrical
 of Matter conductivity between that of a conductor and an
 insulator such as glass.

 Semiconductor • Explain semiconductor with an example. (No
 energy band theory).

 Intrinsic Semiconductor • An intrinsic semiconductor is a
 pure semiconductor.

 Doping • Doping is the process of adding impurities to
 intrinsic semiconductors.

 n-type semiconductor • Discuss n-type semiconductor.

 p type semiconductor • Discuss p-type semiconductor.

 p-n junction diode • Discuss the construction and working of a p-n
 junction diode.

 Experiment 5 • Study the characteristics of p-n junction diode.
 (Materials: Semiconductor diode, Voltmeter,
 milliammeter, Rheostat, switch, battery connecting
 wires etc.)

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 45
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
12 hrs Organic Chemistry

 Organic molecules • Define organic molecules as molecules
 containing carbon atoms.

 Molecular and structural • Write molecular formulae and structural
 formulae formulae for organiccompounds of up to six
 carbon atoms for alkanes, alkenes, alkynes,
 alkylhalides, aldehydes, ketones, alcohols,
 carboxylic acids and esters.

 Functional group • Define functional group as an atom or group
 of atoms that determine the chemistry of a
 molecule.

 Homologous series • Define homologous series as a series of
 compounds that have the same general formula
 and where each member differs from the next
 by –CH2.

 • Distinguish between different homologous
 series.

 Saturated hydrocarbons • Saturated hydrocarbons contain only single
 covalent bonds between the carbon atoms.

 Unsaturated • Unsaturated hydrocarbons contain covalent
 hydrocarbons double or triple bonds between the carbon
 atoms.

 • Distinguish between saturated and unsaturated
 homologous series.

 Isomers • Organic molecules with the same molecular
 formula but with different structures are called
 isomers.
 • Write structural formulae for given isomers and
 name the isomers.

 46 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 IUPAC naming and • Give the IUPAC name when given the formula
 formulae for alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alkylhalides,
 aldehydes, ketones, alcohols, carboxylic acids
 and esters.

 • Give the formula when given the IUPAC name
 for alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, alkylhalides,
 aldehydes, ketones, alcohols, carboxylic acids
 and esters.

 Physical properties of • Discuss physical property relationships
 organic compounds (boiling point, melting point, vapour pressure
 and viscosity) in alkanes, alkenes, alkynes,
 alkylhalides, aldehydes, ketones, alcohols,
 carboxylic acids and esters.

 • Compare physical properties of different
 homologous series.

 Reactions of organic • Oxidation
 compounds
 • Substitution
 • Addition
 • Halogenations
 • Hydrohalogenation
 • Balance equations for the above reactions using
 molecular and structural formulae.
 Plastics and polymers • Describe the terms polymer, macromolecule,
 chains and monomers.
 • Define plastics and polymers.
 • Discuss the industrial use of polythene as a
 basic application of organic chemistry.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 47
 Waves and Sound
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
12 hrs Light

 Reflection of light • Discuss the laws of reflection.

 Experiment 6 • Determine the position of an image in a flat
 mirror.
 (Materials: Flat mirror, Paper, drawing board pins,
 ruler etc.)

 Refraction • Define refraction as the bending of light when it
 passes from one medium to another.
 • Discuss the laws of refraction.

 Experiment 7 (formal) • Determine the path of a ray through a glass slab
 for different angles of incidence.
 Demonstrate
 (Materials: Rectangular glass slab, pins/ray box, white
 the total internal
 paper, Protractor, etc.)
 reflection of light
 using semi-circular
 Critical angle • Define the critical angle as the angle of incident glass (Perspex box),
 in the denser medium such that the refracted ray protector, paper, ruler,
 just passes through the surface of separation of ray box etc.
 the two media.

 Total internal reflection • When the angle of incidence is greater than the
 critical angle, the ray of light reflects into the
 original medium.

 • Discuss the conditions of total internal reflection.
 • Give uses of total internal reflecting prisms.

 48 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 Dispersion • Define the dispersion of light as the Show that white light
 phenomenon whereby white light breaks undergoes dispersion
 up into its component colours. when it passes through
 a triangular prism (Ray
 Lenses • Discuss frequency and wavelength of the box, triangular prism,
 various components of light. etc).

 • Discuss the transmission of light through
 convex and concave lenses.

 • Discuss applications of convex and
 concave lenses.

 Electromagnetic radiation

 Nature of electromagnetic • Define an electromagnetic wave as a
 radiation changing magnetic and electric field
 mutually perpendicular to each other and
 the direction of propagation of the wave.

 Properties of • Discuss the properties of electromagnetic
 electromagnetic radiation waves.

 Electromagnetic spectrum • Discuss the electromagnetic spectrum in
 terms of frequency and wavelength.
 Uses of electromagnetic • Give the uses of electromagnetic radiation.
 radiation

 Photons • Describe a photon of light as a quantum of
 energy.
 Energy of a photon • Energy of a photon of light is given by
 E = hf.

 • Use the above equation to do calculations
 involving energy, frequency and wavelength
 of light.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 49
 calculations involving energy,
 frequency and wavelength of light.
 TERM 3 GRADE 12
Electricity and Magnetism
6 hrs Electrostatics
 TERM 3 GRADE 12
 Time Topics
 • Define a capacitor as a device for
 Grade 12 and Magnetism
 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Guidelines for
 CapacitorElectricity storing electrical charge. Teachers
 6 hrs Electrostatics TERM 3 GRADE 12
 Capacitance
 Electricity and Magnetism • Give examples of • Define a capacitor
 capacitors used as a device for
 Capacitor
 in technology. storing electrical charge.
 6 hrs Electrostatics

 Capacitor Capacitance• Define
 • The capacitance, • Give ofexamples
 aC,capacitor of capacitors
 a as a device for storingused
 capacitor indicatesin
 electricaltechnology.
 charge.
 how much
 charge it can store per volt. The
 • Give • examples
 The capacitance, C, of used
 of capacitors a in
 relationship between
 technology. capacitance,
 C, charge on either capacitor
 surface,indicates
 Q, and how much
 Capacitance voltage,•V, is:The capacitance, C, ofstore
 charge it can per volt. The
 a capacitor indicates
 relationship between capacitance,
 how much charge it can store per volt.
 . C, charge between
 on either surface, Q,
 The relationship capacitance, C, and
 SI units: F charge voltage, V,surface,
 on either is: Q, and voltage,
 • Use the above equation
 V, is: . to
 calculate the capacitance, charge
 and the voltage SI units:
 SI units: F
 between F
 the
 plates. • Use the• Use the equation
 above above equation to the
 to calculate
 -1 capacitance,
 calculate charge
 the and the voltage
 capacitance, charge
 1 F = 1 CV between the plates.
 and the voltage between the
 1 F = 1 CV-1
 • The capacitanceplates.can also be -1
 expressed• as: 1 F = 1 CVcan
 The capacitance also be expressed as:

 • The capacitance can also be
 expressed as:
 ( ε = 8,85 x 10-12Fm-1)
 o

 • Use the above equation to calculate
 the capacitance, area and the distance 61
 between the plates.

 Factors affecting • Discuss the factors affecting capacitance. 61
 capacitance

 50 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 capacitance
 capacitance
6 hrs Electric circuits •• Discuss
 Discuss thethe factors
 factors affecting
 affecting
 capacitance.
 capacitance.
 Power • Define power as the rate at which
 electrical energy is converted in an
 66Topics
 hrs Grade
 hrs Electric
 Electric electric circuit.
 circuits Guidelines for
 Time 12 circuits Content, Concepts & Skills
 2 Teachers
 or P=VI or P=I R or
 6 hrs Electric circuits
 Power
 Power •• Define
 Define power as
 power as the
 the rate
 rate at
 at which
 which
 SI unit of power is W.
 Power •
 electrical
 electrical energy is
 energy is converted
 converted in in an
 an
 Define power as the rate at which electrical
 electric
 electric
 • Practical unit circuit.
 circuit.
 of power
 energy is kWh.
 is converted in an electric circuit.
 22
 P = or or P=VI
 o P=VI or
 P = V or P=I
 o rP=I 2R or
 P = IRR or
 or P=
 • Use the power equations
 SI unit
 SI unitofof
 unit ofpower
 power
 power to is W.
 is
 is W. W.
 calculate power, voltage, current
 and resistance.
 • ••Practical
 Practical
 Practicalunitunit
 of power
 unit is kWh.
 of power
 of power is kWh.
 is kWh.
 Experiment 8
 • Determine• •the
 •Use
 Use
 Use power
 the dissipated
 thepower
 the power
 power equations
 equations
 equations tocalculate
 toto
 in bulbs connectedpower, voltage,
 either current
 in seriesand resistance.
 calculate
 calculate power,
 power, voltage, current
 voltage, current
 or parallel, orand both series
 and resistance.
 resistance. and
 Experiment 8 parallel. • Determine the power dissipated in bulbs
 Heating effect of
 Experiment
 Experiment 88 connected either in series or parallel, or
 electric current (Materials: Bulbs,
 ••both batteries,
 Determine
 Determine the
 the power dissipated
 power dissipated
 series and parallel.
 conducting wires,
 in
 in bulbs
 bulbscrocodile
 connected
 connected clips,either
 either
 (Materials: Bulbs, batteries, conducting in series
 in series
 wires,
 bulb holders, battery
 or parallel,
 or
 crocodile holders,
 parallel, or
 clips, bulb or both
 both series
 holders, series and
 battery and
 holders,
 ammeters, voltmeters
 ammeters, etc.)etc.)
 voltmeters
 parallel.
 parallel.
 Heating effect
 Heating effect ofof
 electric
 electric
 Heating effect current
 current
 of electric
 (Materials: Bulbs,
 (Materials: Bulbs, batteries,
 batteries,
 • The heat • produced in awires,
 The heat produced
 conducting
 conducting resistor
 wires, in
 incrocodile
 a resistor
 crocodile inclips,
 a circuit
 clips,
 current is given by:
 a circuit is given
 bulbby:
 bulb holders, battery
 holders, battery holders,
 holders,
 ammeters, voltmeters
 ammeters, voltmeters etc.) etc.)
 SI unit is J SI unit is J
 • Use the • above
 ••Use
 The
 The equation
 the above
 heat
 heat to
 equationin
 produced
 produced toaacalculate
 in resistorheat
 resistor in
 in
 calculate heat produced,
 produced,
 a circuit
 circuit is current
 current
 is given and
 given by:by:resistance, and time
 and resistance, and time
 SI unit
 SI unit is
 is&JJSkills Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts
 •• Use
 Use thethe above equationTeachers
 above equation to
 to
6 hrs Electromagnetism calculate
 calculate heat
 heat produced,
 produced, current
 current
 and resistance,
 and resistance, and and time
 time
 Magnetic effect of • A current carrying conductor Guidelines for
 Guidelines for
 Time Topics
 Time Topics Grade
 Grade 12 12 Content, Concepts
 Content, Concepts & & Skills
 Skills
 current-carrying produces a magnetic field around Teachers
 Teachers
 66 hrs
 hrs Electromagnetism
 Electromagnetism
 62
 Magnetic effect
 Magnetic effect of
 of •• AA current
 current carrying
 carrying conductor
 conductor
 current-carrying
 current-carrying produces aa magnetic
 produces magnetic field
 field around
 around

 62
 62

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 51
 Time
 conductor conductor it.
 Topics Grade 12
 it.
 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Demonstrate Demonstrate
 Guidelines for
 the directionthe Teachers
 of direction of
 6 hrs Electromagnetism • Determine•the Determine
 directionthe direction of
 of the thethemagnetic the magnetic
 magnetic fieldmagnetic
 aroundfield around the field
 the current currentaroundfield
 the around the
 Magnetic effect of current- • A current carrying conductor produces a
 carrying conductor
 carrying
 carrying conductor. conductor. current
 current carrying carrying
 magnetic field around it.
 conductor. conductor.
 Demonstrate the
 • Draw the
 • Draw the magnetic magnetic
 field lines field lines
 (Using several (Using
 directionseveral
 of the
 around: • Determine
 around: the direction of the magnetic
 compasses compasses
 ormagnetic fieldoraround
 field around the current carrying conductor. the current carrying
 Electromagnetic
 Electromagnetic i) a straight i) a straight
 current current
 carrying carrying
 wire. wire.
 fillings) fillings)
 conductor. (Using
 Induction Induction ii) a current ii) a current
 carrying loopcarrying
 (single)loopof (single) of several compasses or
 • Draw the magnetic field lines around:
 wire. wire. fillings)
 i) a straight current carrying wire.
 Magnetic flux Magnetic flux ii) a current carrying loop (single) of wire.
 • Define the•electromagnetic
 Define the electromagnetic
 induction• asinduction
 Electromagnetic Induction the process
 Define theas electromagnetic
 the
 of process ofinduction as
 generating
 generating electricity
 the process electricity
 from of motion. fromelectricity
 generating motion.from
 motion.
 Magnetic flux
 Magnetic flux • Define
 • Define magnetic magnetic
 flux as the flux as the
 density density
 Magnetic flux number
 number of field ofperpendicular
 field lines
 linesmagnetic
 Define flux asperpendicular
 the number of field
 to the given tolines
 the given surface. given surface.
 perpendicular
 surface. to the
 •
 SI unit is WbSI unit is Wb
 SI unit is Wb

 Magnetic flux density • Define
 • Define magnetic fluxmagnetic
 density flux
 as density as
 • Define magnetic flux density as the number
 the number the number
 ofoffield linesof field lines through unit
 field lines perpendicular
 perpendicular
 perpendicular through unitthrough
 area. area. unit area.

 B B
 A A
 SI unit: T SISIunit: T
 unit: T
 -2 = 1 Wb.m-2 -2
 1T = 1 Wb.m1T 1 Wb.m
 1T

 • Use the• above Useequation
 • Use the
 the above
 above toequation
 equationto determine
 to the
 magnetic flux, magnetic flux density and
 determine thedetermine
 magneticthe magnetic flux,
 flux,
 area.
 magnetic fluxmagnetic
 density flux
 and density
 area. and area.
 Guidelines Guidelines
 for for
Time TimeGrade
 Topics Topics
 12 Grade 12 Concepts
 Content, Content,&Concepts
 Skills & Skills
 Teachers Teachers
 Faraday’s •law
 Faraday’s law Faraday’s •Law Faraday’s Lawwhen
 states that states that when
 the magnetic the magnetic
 flux fluxthe
 linked with linked with the
 coil changes,coilanchanges, an emfinis induced in
 emf is induced
 the coil. Thethe coil. Theof
 magnitude magnitude
 the of the
 induced emfinduced emf
 is directly is directly proportional
 proportional
 to the rate oftochange
 the rateofofmagnetic
 change of magnetic
 flux. flux.

 Lenz’s law Lenz’s law
 (-ve sign
 (-ve sign indicates indicates
 that the emfthat
 is inthe emf is in
 the oppositethe opposite
 direction direction
 to the effectto the effect
 that producesthat
 it)produces it)

 63 63

 52 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 magnetic flux density and area.
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 Faraday’s law • Faraday’s Law states that when
 the magnetic flux linked with the Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 coil changes, an emf is induced in
 Faraday’s law • • Lenz’s law
 Faraday’s Lawstates
 statesthat
 thatthewhen the
 the coil. The magnitude of the
 directionflux
 magnetic of linked
 the induced
 with the emf in the
 coil changes,
 induced emfan is emf
 directly
 is proportional
 induced in the coil. The magnitude
 coil opposes the effect that
 to the rate ofofchange of magnetic
 the induced
 produces it. emf is directly proportional
 flux. to the rate of change of magnetic flux.

 • Use examples from technology to
 Lenz’s law
 demonstrate Lenz’s law.
 (-ve sign indicates
 (-ve signthat the emf
 indicates that is
 theinemf is in
 the oppositethe
 direction
 oppositetodirection
 the effect
 to the effect that
 Experiment 10 • Determine
 produces it) the effect of the
 that produces it)
 change in magnetic field or
 Lenz’s law • magnetic
 Lenz’s flux inthat
 law states a coil.
 the direction of the
 (Materials:
 induced emf inCoil, galvanometer
 the coil or
 opposes the effect
 that produces
 ammeter, it.
 connecting wires, bar
 • magnet,
 Use etc). from technology to
 examples 63
 demonstrate Lenz’s law.
 Experiment 10
 Transformer • Determine the effect ofasthe
 • Define transformer change in
 a device
 magnetic field or magnetic flux in a coil.
 used to step up or step down the
 • (Materials: Coil, galvanometer or ammeter,
 voltage.
 connecting wires, bar magnet, etc).
 • Define the transformer as a device used to
 Transformer • The
 step upoutput
 or step voltage
 down the is determined
 voltage.
 •
 by the number of turns in the
 The output voltage is determined by
 primary
 the numberandofsecondary
 turns in thecoils andand
 primary
 the input coils
 secondary voltage:
 and the input voltage:

 •
 • Use the above equation to
 Use the above equation to determine the
 determine
 input voltage,the input
 output voltage,
 voltage, and output
 number
 voltage,
 of andprimary
 turns in the numberandof turns incoils.
 secondary the
 primary and secondary coils.
 Guidelines for
 Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 • A transformer that increases the
 voltage is called a step-up
 transformer.

 • A transformer that decreases the
 voltage is called a step-down
 transformer.

 Generator • Define a generator as a device
 that converts mechanical energy
 into electrical energy.

 • Explain the basic principle of an
 AC generator (alternator). Construct an
 electric motor,
 • Explain how a DC generator
 works and how it differs from an
 AC generator.

 64

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 53
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 • A transformer that increases the voltage is
 called a step-up transformer.

 • A transformer that decreases the voltage is
 called a step-down transformer.

 Generator • Define a generator as a device that
 converts mechanical energy into electrical
 energy.

 • Explain the basic principle of an AC
 generator (alternator).
 Construct an electric
 motor,
 • Explain how a DC generator works and
 how it differs from an
 AC generator.

 Motor • Define a motor as a device that converts
 electrical energy to mechanical energy.

 • Explain the basic principles of an electric
 motor.

 54 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Guidelines for
Time Topics Grade 12 Content, Concepts & Skills
 Teachers
 Chemical Change
10 hs Electrochemical cells

 Electrolytic cells • Define the electrolytic cell as an
 electrochemical cell that converts
 electrical energy to chemical energy. (Non-
 spontaneous cell).

 Experiment 11 • Electrolysis of copper chloride
 (Materials: Copper chloride, beaker, water, cells,
 connecting wires, etc).
 Galvanic cells • Define the galvanic (voltaic) cell as an
 electrochemical cell that converts chemical
 energy to electrical energy. (Spontaneous
 cell).
 Components of galvanic • State the functions of all components of the
 cells galvanic cell.

 Experiment 12 (formal) • Determine the electrode potential of a Cu-
 Zn cell.
 (Materials: Two beakers, zinc electrode, copper
 electrode, copper sulphate, zinc sulphate,
 potassium nitrate, connecting wires, salt bridge,
 voltmeter, etc).

 Half reactions • Give the half-reactions at the anode and
 cathode.

 Net reaction • Give the net reaction.

 Standard conditions • Give the standard conditions under
 which standard electrode potentials are
 determined.

 Ionic movement • Describe the movement of ions through the
 solutions and the salt bridge.
 •
 Standard cell notation • Use standard cell notation or diagrams to
 represent a galvanic cell.

 Emf of a cell • Calculate the emf of the cell using the
 standard electrode potential table:
 Emf=Ecathode- Eanode

 Alternate Energies Discuss the use of alternate energies and
 their environmental impact.
 Biodiesel
 fuel cells
 (photovoltaic cells)

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 55
 SECTION 4

4. ASSESSMENT
4.1 Introduction

Assessment is a continuous planned process of identifying, gathering and interpreting information about the performance
of learners, using various forms of assessment. It involves four steps: generating and collecting evidence of achievement;
evaluating this evidence; recording the findings; and using this information to understand and thereby assist the learners’
development in order to improve the process of learning and teaching.

Assessment should be both informal (Assessment for Learning) and formal (Assessment of Learning). In both cases
regular feedback should be provided to learners to enhance the learning experience. Assessment is a process that
measures individual learner’s attainment of knowledge (content, concepts and skills) in a subject by collecting, analysing
and interpreting the data and information obtained from this process to:

• enable the teacher to make reliable judgements about a learner’s progress

• inform learners about their strengths, weaknesses and progress

• assist teachers, parents and other stakeholders in making decisions about the learning process and the progress
 of the learners.

Assessment should be mapped against the content, concepts and skills, and the aims specified for Technical Sciences,
and in both informal and formal assessments it is important to ensure that in the course of a school year:

• all of the subject content is covered

• the full range of skills is included

• a variety of different forms of assessment are used.

4.2 Informal or daily assessment

Assessment for learning has the purpose of continuously collecting information on a learner’s achievements that can
be used to improve their learning.

Informal assessment is a daily monitoring of learners’ progress. This is done through observations, discussions,
practical demonstrations, learner-teacher conferences, informal classroom interactions, etc. Informal assessment may
be as simple as stopping during the lesson to observe learners or to discuss with learners how learning is progressing.
Informal assessment should be used to provide feedback to the learners and to inform planning for teaching, but need
not be recorded. It should not be seen as separate from learning activities taking place in the classroom. Learners or
teachers can mark these assessment tasks.

Self-assessment and peer assessment actively involves learners in assessment. This is important as it allows learners
to learn from and reflect on their own performance. The results of the informal daily assessment tasks are not formally
recorded unless the teacher wishes to do so. The results of daily assessment tasks are not taken into account for
promotion and certification purposes.

Informal, on-going assessments should be used to structure the acquisition of knowledge and skills and should be
precursors to formal tasks in the Programme of Assessment.

 56 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 4.3 Formal assessment

 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT
 School-based Assessment – SBA Practical Assessment Task – PAT Final Examination
 25 % 25 % 50 %

All assessment tasks that make up a formal programme of assessment for the year are regarded as Formal Assessment.
Formal assessment tasks are marked and formally recorded by the teacher for progression and certification purposes. All
Formal Assessment tasks are subject to moderation for the purpose of quality assurance and to ensure that appropriate
standards are maintained.

Formal assessment provides teachers with a systematic way of evaluating how well learners are progressing in a grade
and in a particular subject. Examples of formal assessments include tests, examinations, practical tasks, projects, oral
presentations, demonstrations, performances, etc. Formal assessment tasks form part of a year-long formal Programme
of Assessment in each grade and subject.

4.3.1 Control tests & examinations

Control tests and examinations are written under controlled conditions within a specified period of time. Questions in tests
and examinations should assess performance at different cognitive levels with an emphasis on process skills, critical
thinking, scientific reasoning and strategies to investigate and solve problems in a variety of scientific, technological,
environmental and everyday contexts.

4.3.2 Practical investigations & experiments

Practical investigations and experiments should focus on the practical aspects and the process skills required for scientific
inquiry and problem solving. Assessment activities should be designed so that learners are assessed on their use of
scientific inquiry skills, like planning, observing and gathering information, comprehending, synthesising, generalising,
hypothesising and communicating results and conclusions. Practical investigations should assess performance at
different cognitive levels and focus on process skills, critical thinking, scientific reasoning and strategies to investigate
and solve problems in a variety of scientific, technological, environmental and everyday contexts.

The difference between a practical investigation and an experiment is that an experiment is conducted to verify or test a
known theory, whereas an investigation is an experiment that is conducted to test a hypothesis, i.e. the result or outcome
is not known beforehand.

4.3.3 Projects

A project is an integrated assessment task that focuses on process skills, critical thinking and scientific reasoning, as
well as strategies to investigate and solve problems in a variety of scientific, technological, environmental and everyday
contexts. This requires a learner to follow the scientific method to produce either a device or a model, or to conduct a
practical investigation.

A project will entail only one of the following:

(i) Construction of a device e.g. electric motor.

(ii) Building a physical model in order to solve a challenge you have identified using concepts in the FET Technical
 Sciences curriculum.

(iii) Practical investigation.

Note:

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 57
 The learner has the option to include a poster as part of the presentation of his/her project. The assessment tools used,
specifying the assessment criteria for each task, will be dictated by the nature of the task and the focus of assessment.
Assessment tools could be one or a combination of rubrics, checklists, observation schedules and memoranda.

REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADE 10, 11 AND 12 PRACTICAL WORK

In Grades 10 and 11 learners will do FOUR prescribed experiments for formal assessment and ONE project. This gives
a total of FIVE formal assessments in practical work in Physical Sciences in each of Grades 10 and 11.

In Grades 10 and 11 it is recommended that learners do TEN experiments for informal assessment. This gives a total of
FIFTEEN assessments in practical work in Technical Sciences in each of Grades 10 and 11.

In Grade 12 learners will do THREE prescribed experiments for formal assessment and one project. This gives a total
of FOUR assessments in practical work in Technical Sciences in Grade 12.

In Grade 12 it is recommended that learners do FIVE experiments for informal assessment. This gives a total of FIVE
informal assessments in practical work in Technical Sciences in Grade 12.

Grades 10 and 11

Table 2: Practical work for Grades 10 and 11

Practical work Number of tasks
Prescribed experiments (formal assessment) 4
Project (formal assessment) 1
Experiments (informal assessment) 10
TOTAL 15 practical activities

Grade 12

Table 3: Practical work for Grade 12

Practical work Number of tasks
Prescribed experiments (formal assessment) 3
Project (formal assessment) 1
Experiments (informal assessment) 5
TOTAL 9 practical activities

4.4 Programme of Assessment

The Programme of Assessment is designed to spread formal assessment tasks in all subjects in a school throughout a
term.

4.4.1 Programme of formal assessment for Grades 10, 11 and 12

Assessment consists of three components: SBA (25 %), PAT (25%) and the final examination which makes up the
remaining 50%. The following table illustrates the assessment plan and weighting of tasks in the programme of
assessment for Technical Sciences Grades 10, 11 and 12.

 58 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT FOR GRADES 10, 11 and 12
ASSESSMENT TASKS (25%) + PAT (25%) END-OF-YEAR
 ASSESS-MENT
 (50%)
TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
Type Mark Type Mark Type Mark Final Examination
Experiment 20 Experiment 30 Experiments (PAT) 100 (2 x 150 marks
(SBA) (SBA) giving a total
Control Test 20 Mid-Year 40 Trial Examination 40 of 300 marks for
(SBA) Examination (Grade 12) papers 1 and 2)
 (SBA) Control Test
 Project 50 (Grades 10 and 11)
 (PAT) (SBA)
Total: 40 marks Total: 120 marks Total: 140 marks Total: 300 marks
Total = 600 marks
FINAL MARK = 25% (ASSESSMENT TASKS), 25 % (PAT) + 50% (FINAL EXAM) = 100%

* PAT will consist of two experiments (one in Physics and one in Chemistry) + One Project. These will be set annually
by the DBE.

4.4.2 End-of-year Examinations

4.4.2.1 Grades 10 and 11 (internal assessment)

The end-of-year examination papers for Grades 10 and 11 will be internally set, marked and moderated, unless otherwise
instructed by provincial departments of education.

The internally set, marked and moderated examination will consist of two papers.

4.4.2.2 Grade 12 (external assessment)

The external examinations are set externally, administered at schools under conditions specified in the National policy
on the conduct, administration and management of the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the
National Qualifications Framework (NQF) and marked externally.

The core content outlined in the Technical Sciences Curriculum and Assessment Policy (CAPS) document is compulsory
and will be examined through Papers 1 and 2. Note that all the topics in the Grade 12 curriculum are examinable in the
end of year examination.

Multiple-choice questions could be set in examination papers. However, such questions should have a maximum
weighting of 10%. The examination paper may also consist of conceptual type questions.

The final end-of-year examination is nationally set, marked and moderated.

The nationally set, marked and moderated examination will consist of two papers:

• Paper 1: (3 hours, 150 marks)

• Paper 2: (3 hours, 150 marks)

• All of the questions will focus on content as stated in the National Curriculum Statement.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 59
 4.4.2.3 Year-end Examination Content for Paper 1 and Paper 2: Technical Science

Grade Paper 1 Paper 2
10 Mechanics and Electrostatics Matter and materials, Chemical change, Heat
 and thermodynamics
11 Mechanics, Magnetism and Electricity Chemical change, Heat and thermodynamics,
 Waves and Sound
12 Mechanics, Magnetism and Electricity Organic chemistry, Chemical change, Waves,
 Sound and Light

4.4.2.4 Weighting of topics in papers 1 and 2

Grade 10
Paper Content Percentage Total marks per Duration (hours)
 paper
Paper 1 Mechanics 68 150 3
 Electricity and 32
 Magnetism
Paper 2 Matter and materials 84
 Chemical change 0
 Heat and 16
 thermodynamics 150 3
 Waves, Sound and 0
 Light

Grade 11
Paper Content Percentage Total marks per Duration (hours)
 paper
Paper 1 Mechanics 47 150 3
 Electricity and 53
 Magnetism
Paper 2 Chemical change 23
 Heat and 21
 thermodynamics
 Waves, Sound and 56 150 3
 Light

Grade 12
Paper Content Marks Total marks per Duration (hours)
 paper
Paper 1 Mechanics 72 150 3
 Electricity and 28
 magnetism
Paper 2 Organic chemistry 36 150 3
 Chemical change 28
 Waves, Sound and 36
 Light

 60 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 4.5 Recording and reporting

Recording is a process in which the teacher documents the level of a learner’s performance in a specific assessment
task. It indicates learner progress towards the achievement of the knowledge and skills as prescribed in the Curriculum
and Assessment Policy Statements. Records of learner performance should provide evidence of the learner’s conceptual
progression within a grade and her/his readiness to progress or be promoted to the next grade.

Records of learner performance should also be used to verify the progress made by teachers and learners in the
teaching and learning process.

Reporting is a process of communicating learner performance to learners, parents, schools and other stakeholders.

Learner performance can be reported in a number of ways. These include report cards, parents’ meetings, school
visitation days, parent-teacher conferences, phone calls, letters, class or school newsletters, etc. Teachers in all grades
report in percentages against the subject.

4.5.1 Recording and reporting in the first, second and third terms

Schools are required to provide quarterly feedback to parents on the Programme of Assessment using a formal reporting
tool such as a report card. The schedule and the report card should indicate the overall level of performance of a learner.
Schools should use the following weighting for reporting purposes only and only in the first, second and third terms
of Grades 10, 11 and 12:

 Practical Work Control test/mid-year exam
 Weighting 50 % 50 %

4.5.2 Recording and reporting on the Assessment Tasks and SBA in the Programme of Assessment

Schools are also required to provide quarterly feedback to parents and learners of the marks obtained by learners in the
assessment tasks as given.

4.5.3 Recording and reporting at the end of the academic year

The weighting of tasks in the Programme of Assessment must be strictly adhered to when calculating the final mark of
the learner for promotion purposes in each of Grades 10, 11 and 12, at the end of the academic year.

4.6 Moderation of Assessment

4.6.1 SBA

Moderation refers to the process that ensures that the assessment tasks are fair, valid and reliable. Moderation should
be implemented at school, district, provincial and national levels. Comprehensive and appropriate moderation practices
must be in place for the quality assurance of all subject assessments.

All Grade 10 and 11 tasks are internally moderated. The subject head or head of department for Technical Sciences at
the school will generally manage this process.

All Grade 12 tasks should be externally moderated. The subject head or head of department for Technical Sciences at
the school will generally manage this process.

 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 61
 4.6.2 PAT

The final phase of the PAT (both project and experiments) will be assessed by the teacher and externally moderated by
the Provincial subject specialist, for Grade 12 only. Each Province will set out dates for external moderation. Learners
will be selected randomly to demonstrate skills from PAT (both project and experiments).

4.7 General

This document should be read in conjunction with:

4.7.1 [National Protocol of Assessment] An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol for
 Assessment (Grades R – 12).

4.7.2 Progression and Promotion Requirements Grades 1 – 12.

4.7.3 Subject specific exam guidelines as contained in the draft policy document:

National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement, Grades
R – 12.

 62 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 CAPS TECHNICAL SCIENCES 63
 64 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)