National Curriculum Statement (NCS)

 Curriculum and Assessment
 Policy Statement
EQUINE STUDIES

 2019

 Further Education and Training Phase
 Grades 10–12

 basic education
 Department: Basic Education
 REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
 GRADES 10–12

 EQUINE STUDIES

CAPS
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
Department of Basic Education

222 Struben Street Private Bag X895 Pretoria 0001 South Africa
Tel: +27 12 357 3000
Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street Private Bag X9023 Cape Town 8000
South Africa
Tel: +27 21 465 1701
Fax: +27 21 461 8110
Website: http://www.education.gov.za

©2011DepartmentofBasicEducation
ISBN:978-1-4315-0578-4

Design and Layout by: Ndabase Printing Solution Printed by: Government Printing Works

CAPS
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
FOREWORD BY THE MINISTER

 Our national curriculum is the culmination of our efforts over a period of
 seventeen years to transform the curriculum bequeathed to us by
 apartheid. From the start of democracy we have built our curriculum on the
 values that inspired our Constitution (Act 108 of 1996). The Preamble to the
 Constitution states that the aims of the Constitution are to:

 • heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on
 democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights;

 • improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each
 person;

 • lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which
 government is based on the will of the people and every citizen is
 equally protected by law; and

• build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family
 of nations.

Education and the curriculum have an important role to play in realising these aims.

In 1997 we introduced outcomes-based education to overcome the curricular divisions of the past, but the
experience of implementation prompted a review in 2000. This led to the first curriculum revision: the Revised
National Curriculum Statement Grades R–9 and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10–12 (2002).

Ongoing implementation challenges resulted in another review in 2009 and we revised the Revised National
Curriculum Statement (2002) to produce this document.

From 2012 the two 2002 curricula, for Grades R–9 and Grades 10–12 respectively, are combined in a single
document and will simply be known as the National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12. The National
Curriculum Statement for Grades R–12 builds on the previous curriculum but also updates it and aims to
provide clearer specification of what is to be taught and learnt on a term-by-term basis.

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 accordingly replaces the Subject Statements, Learning
Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines with the

(a) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS) for all approved subjects listed in this
 document;

(b) National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R–12; and

(c) National Protocol for Assessment Grades R–12.

MRS ANGIE MOTSHEKGA, MP
MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION

CAPS
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

CONTENTS
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY
STATEMENTS FOR EQUINE STUDIES
1.1 Background 2
1.2 Overview 2
1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum 3
1.4 Time Allocation 5
 1.4.1 Foundation Phase 5
 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase 5
 1.4.3 Senior Phase 6
 1.4.4 Grades 10–12 6
SECTION 2: INTRODUCTION TO EQUINE STUDIES 7
2.1 The purpose of Equine Studies 7
2.2 Specific Aims of Equine Studies 8
2.3 Equine Studies Career Opportunities 8
SECTION 3: CONTENT OVERVIEW 9
Topic 1: Equine Nutrition 9
Topic 2: Equine Anatomy and Physiology 9
Topic 3: Equine Health Care 9
Topic 4: Equine Stable Yard Management and Behaviour 9
Topic 5A: Horsemanship 10
Topic 5B: Horsemastership 10
SECTION 4: ASSESSMENT IN EQUINE STUDIES 11
A. Means of Assessment: Grade 12 11
B. Requirements of Assessment: Grade 12 11
 1. Examination 11
 2. School-Based Assessment (SBA) 12
C. Interpretation of Requirements 13
 1. Examination 13
 2. The Assessment Syllabus 14
 3. School-Based Assessment 14
D. Administrative Documents and Appendices 30
 1. Administrative Documentation for SBA
 1.1 Teacher's SBA File Cover Sheet 31
 1.2 Candidate's SBA File Cover Sheet 32
 1.3 Teacher's Record of SBA Marks 33
 1.4 SBA Rank-Order Sheet 34
 1.5 Regional and National Moderation Tool 35
 1.6 Final Moderation Feedback Form to IEB 37
 1.7 Example of Letter of Authenticity 38
 1.8 Example of Declaration of Omissions 39
 2 Appendices 40
 2.1 Appendix A: Example of a Design Grid 40
 2.2 Appendix B: Bloom's Taxonomy of Cognitive Demand 41
 2.3 Appendix C: Equestrian Competition Disciplines 42
 2.4 Appendix D: Horsemanship Log Record 43
 2.5 Appendix E: Horsemastership Log Record 44
 2.6 Appendix F: Horsemastership – Suggested Template for Project
 Proposal 45
CAPS 1
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

SECTION 1
INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS FOR
EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

1.1 Background

 The National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum
 and assessment in the schooling sector.

 To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the
 amendments coming into effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and
 Assessment Policy document was developed for each subject to replace Subject
 Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines in
 Grades R–12.

1.2 Overview

 (a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 (January 2012) represents a
 policy statement for learning and teaching in South African schools and comprises
 the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school
 subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and
 promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12;
 and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R–12
 (January 2012).

 (b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 (January 2012) replaces the two
 current national curricula statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R–9, Government Gazette
 No. 23406 of 31 May 2002, and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10–12 Government Gazettes,
 No. 25545 of 6 October 2003 and No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

 (c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii)
 comprise the following policy documents which will be incrementally repealed by
 the National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 (January 2012) during the period
 2012–2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines
 and Subject Assessment Guidelines for Grades R–9 and Grades 10–12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for
 schools in the General Education and Training Band d, promulgated in
 Government Notice No. 124 in Government Gazette No. 29626 of
 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4
 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government
 Gazette No. 27819 of 20 July 2005;

2 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National
 Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications
 Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special needs, published in
 Government Gazette, No. 29466 of 11 December 2006, is incorporated in
 the policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and
 promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12;
 and

 (v) The policy document, an addendum to the policy document, the National
 Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications
 Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol for Assessment (Grades
 R–12), promulgated in Government Notice No. 1267 in Government Gazette
 No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.

 (d) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion
 requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12, and the sections
 on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy as contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4
 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the National Curriculum
 Statement Grades R–12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South
 African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of
 Basic Education to determine minimum outcomes and standards, as well as the
 processes and procedures for the assessment of learner achievement to be
 applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum

 (a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 gives expression to the
 knowledge, skills and values worth learning in South African schools. This
 curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply knowledge and skills in
 ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes
 knowledge in local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

 (b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 serves the purposes of:

 • equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race,
 gender, physical ability or intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and
 values necessary for self-fulfilment, and meaningful participation in society as
 citizens of a free country;

 • providing access to higher education;

 • facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace;
 and

 • providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner's competences.

 (c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 is based on the following
 principles:

 • Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are
 redressed, and that equal educational opportunities are provided for all sections
 of the population;

 • Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to
 learning, rather than rote and uncritical learning of given truths;

CAPS 3
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 • High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills
 to be achieved at each grade are specified and set high, achievable standards
 in all subjects;

 • Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple
 to complex;

 • Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the
 principles and practices of social and environmental justice and human rights as
 defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 is sensitive to issues of diversity such as
 poverty, inequality, race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;

 • Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and
 heritage of this country as important contributors to nurturing the values
 contained in the Constitution; and

 • Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in
 quality, breadth and depth to those of other countries.

 (d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R–12 aims to produce learners that are
 able to:

 • identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative
 thinking;

 • work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

 • organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and
 effectively;

 • collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

 • communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various
 modes;

 • use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility
 towards the environment and the health of others; and

 • demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by
 recognising that problem solving contexts do not exist in isolation.

 (e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching
 at each school. This can only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of
 how to recognise and address barriers to learning, and how to plan for diversity.

 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and
 addressed by all the relevant support structures within the school community,
 including teachers, District-Based Support Teams, Institutional-Level Support
 Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers in
 the classroom, teachers should use various curriculum differentiation strategies
 such as those included in the Department of Basic Education's Guidelines for
 Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

4 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
1.4 TIME ALLOCATION

 1.4.1 Foundation Phase
 (a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 GRADE R GRADES 1–2 GRADE 3
 SUBJECT
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)
 Home Language 10 8/7 8/7
 First Additional Language 2/3 3/4
 Mathematics 7 7 7
 Life Skills 6 6 7

 • Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)

 • Creative Arts (2) (2) (2)

 • Physical Education (2) (2) (2)

 • Personal and Social Well-being (1) (1) (1)
 TOTAL 23 23 25

 (b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is
 25 hours.
 (c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R–2 and 11 hours in
 Grade 3. A maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated for
 Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and a maximum of 3 hours for
 Additional Language in Grades 1–2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours and
 a minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of
 3 hours and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

 (d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R–2 and
 2 hours as indicated by the hours in brackets for Grade 3.

 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

 (a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Mathematics 6
 Natural Sciences and Technology 3,5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4

 • Creative Arts (1,5)

 • Physical Education (1)

 • Personal and Social Well-being (1,5)
 TOTAL 27,5

CAPS 5
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 1.4.3 Senior Phase

 (a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 5
 First Additional Language 4
 Mathematics 4,5
 Natural Sciences 3
 Social Sciences 3
 Technology 2
 Economic Management Sciences 2
 Life Orientation 2
 Creative Arts 2
 TOTAL 27,5

 1.4.4 Grades 10–12

 (a) The instructional time in Grades 10–12 is as follows:

 TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK
 SUBJECT
 (HOURS)
 Home Language 4.5
 First Additional Language 4.5
 Mathematics 4.5
 Life Orientation 2
 A minimum of any three subjects 12 (3 × 4 h)
 selected from Group B Annexure B,
 Tables B1–B8 of the policy document,
 National policy pertaining to the
 programme and promotion
 requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R–12,
 subject to the provisos stipulated in
 paragraph 28 of the said policy
 document.
 TOTAL 27,5

 The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS
 subjects as specified above, and may not be used for any additional subjects added
 to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish to offer additional subjects,
 additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

6 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

SECTION 2
INTRODUCTION TO EQUINE STUDIES

2.1 THE PURPOSE OF EQUINE STUDIES

 Equine Studies is the study of the horse as a living organism as well as in its relationship to
 society. Equine Studies combines theory and practice, enabling learners to apply specific
 principles when working with horses in a variety of contexts and for a variety of purposes
 that have economic, aesthetic, social and/or cultural value.

 Equine Studies will equip the learner with the skills and knowledge of horse care and
 management to internationally accepted standards and will introduce learners to the
 diverse, equine and equestrian industry in South Africa.

 Equine Studies consists of the following:

 • Management skills
 Knowledge and skills regarding the planning, organising, guiding, controlling and
 evaluation of the factors of care and production in order to achieve sustainable equine
 and equestrian enterprises

 • Entrepreneurial skills
 Imparting entrepreneurial skills applicable to the equine industry to the next generation
 of equine and equestrian practitioners.

 • Equine production
 Equine genetic resources; breeding; specific feeding and planning of rations; equine
 health and welfare; production systems; production facilities; risk management; and
 financial aspects.

 • Scientific inquiry and problem-solving skills
 Equine Studies introduces the learner to the essential skills, arts and techniques of
 basic scientific research. The skills that learners develop and use in Equine Studies
 allow them to solve problems, think critically, make decisions, find answers and satisfy
 their curiosity. They are the focus of learning and assessment activities in the
 classroom. These skills cannot be developed in isolation. They are best developed
 within the context of an expanding framework of knowledge. Learners have been
 introduced to some of these skills in Natural Sciences in the General Education and
 Training band, but these skills need further development. In addition, new skills need to
 be developed.

 The following concepts are embedded in Equine Studies:
 – the horse is a living organism that requires care and management
 – animal rights in accordance with South African legislation are applicable to the horse
 – the horse has a historical relationship with man and society, has been influenced by
 society and has, in turn, influenced the development of society.

 Equine Studies should take into account the historical context of the equine industry in
 South Africa and the need for sustainable equine activity and equity. The subject Equine
 Studies operates within the broader context of transformative legislation and policies such
 as those related to the environment, labour, sport and recreation, agriculture and other
 relevant provisions.

CAPS 7
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
2.2 THE SPECIFIC AIMS OF EQUINE STUDIES

 Equine Studies aims to teach and prepare learners to:
 • understand the social contribution of the subject, Equine Studies, with regard to the
 promotion of a culture of human rights, economic growth sustainability as a tool for
 change, improving the quality of life and providing solutions that are responsive to
 individual and community needs;
 • foster a positive attitude towards a rural lifestyle associated with equine activity in
 general;
 • give learners insight into the management of an equine enterprise and to be acquainted
 with the discipline of a well organised equine/equestrian stable yard;
 • organise and manage activities responsibly and effectively collect, analyse, critically
 evaluate and present information;
 • be exposed to techniques and skills specific to the care, management and riding of
 equines;
 • communicate effectively using verbal, written, visual, graphical, electronic
 communication and mathematical skills as applied to Equine Studies;
 • be competent, informed, and responsible citizens (knowledge and skills) in the field of
 life sciences (while managing the resources), caring for the environment, (attitudes and
 values) by addressing indigenous knowledge and social issues;
 • creatively and critically think in an equine and equestrian environment amongst others,
 to develop and enhance entrepreneurial skills;
 • identify and solve problems by exposure to the equine or equestrian environment;
 • care for the environment, through the management of natural resources and the
 acceptable humane treatment of horses;
 • acquire and utilise relevant technology in the equine or equestrian industry; and
 • have access to and value lifelong learning, as well as have access to a variety of
 possible career opportunities in the equine and equestrian industry.

 Through Equine Studies, learners can develop an understanding of the interrelationship of
 science, technology, indigenous knowledge, environment, and society. A study of concepts
 and processes in Equine Studies uses contributions from the past to inform the present,
 and therefore promotes construction of new knowledge. Exploring indigenous knowledge
 systems related to horses and to science exposes learners to different worldviews and
 allows them to appreciate, compare and evaluate different scientific perspectives.

2.3 EQUINE STUDIES CAREER OPPORTUNITIES

 The subject opens the gateway to the world of work through equipping learners with the
 knowledge, skills, attitudes and values required in the equine and equestrian industry:
 • Equine breeding enterprises
 • Equestrian sports
 • Horse racing
 • Equine health care
 • Equine transportation
 • Equine nutrition
 • Equestrian tourism
 • Equestrian security and law enforcement
 • Equestrian event management
 • Equine/equestrian equipment manufacture
 • Equine welfare
 • Equine/Equestrian education services

8 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

SECTION 3
CONTENT OVERVIEW

 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
Topic 1 • Digestion • Digestion • Digestion
 • Feeding the horse • Feeding the horse • Feeding the horse
Equine Nutrition • Conditions of gastro intestinal system • Conditions of gastro intestinal system • Conditions of gastro intestinal system
 • External structure • External structure • External Structure
 • Conformation • Conformation • Conformation
 • Functional Systems: • Functional Systems: • Functional Systems:

Topic 2 1. Skeletal system 1. Skeletal system 1. Skeletal system
 2. Muscular system 2. Muscular system 2. Muscular system
Equine Anatomy 3. Cardiovascular system 3. Cardiovascular system 3. Cardiovascular system
and 4. Respiratory system 4. Respiratory system 4. Respiratory system
Physiology 5. Neuro and endocrine system 5. Neuro and endocrine system 5. Neuro and endocrine system
 6. Reproduction 6. Urogenital system 6. Reproduction
 7. Reproduction

 • The equine foot • The equine foot • The equine foot
 • History of the horses' development • Parasites • Dentition
Topic 3 • Common diseases • Common diseases • Parasites
 • Equine first aid • Welfare • Common diseases
Equine Health • Lameness • Equine first aid • Equine first aid
Care • Castration • Lameness
 • Lameness • Reproduction
Topic 4 • Grooming and turnout • Lunging • Travel and trucking
 • Blankets and boots • Advanced tack • Pasture management
Equine Stable • Tack • Stable vices
Yard • Yard management /daily routine • Horse psychology
Management and • Risk Management • Running a stable yard
Behaviour • Risk management

CAPS 9
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
 • Tack up a horse • Compete in discipline of choice at • Compete in discipline of choice at a
 • Mount and dismount Novice level level higher than Novice
Topic 5A • •
 • Ride at 3 paces Maintain a log of competition events Maintain a log of competition events
 • Ride out of enclosed area at Novice Level higher than novice level
Horsemanship
 • Road Safety • Ride an unknown horse on the flat
 • Maintain a log of personal riding

Topic 5B Non-riding Practical Project Non-riding Practical Project Non-riding Practical Project
 Compile a Portfolio of Evidence/Visual Compile a Portfolio of Evidence/Visual Compile a Portfolio of Evidence/Visual
Horsemastership Diary and log of activities totalling 160 Diary and log of activities totalling 160 Diary and log of activities totalling 160
 hours hours hours

10 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

SECTION 4
ASSESSMENT IN EQUINE STUDIES

A. MEANS OF ASSESSMENT

 Grade 12

 Paper 1 Theory 3 hours [200]
 Paper 2 Practical (either Riding or Non-Riding option) [100]
 School-Based Assessment [100]

 400 marks

B. REQUIREMENTS OF ASSESSMENT

 1. EXAMINATION

 Theory
 Equine Studies
 Paper
 Time: 3 hours Total Marks: 200
 Structure Assesses fundamental understanding of the role of Equine Nutrition; Anatomy,
 of the Physiology, Health Care, Behaviour and Stable Yard Management for the well-
 paper: being and performance of an equine.

 The paper consists of three Sections.
 Section A: Short questions 70 marks
 Section B: Longer Response Type questions 100 marks
 Section C: Case Study 30 marks
 All questions are compulsory.
 Weighting 60% 40%
 of
 30% 20% 10% 10% 15% 15%
 Cognitive
 Levels: Knowledge Comprehension Application Analysis Synthesis Evaluation

 Practical
 Horsemanship (Riding Option)
 Paper

 Time: 3 hours Total Marks: 100

 Assesses practical riding proficiency on an unknown horse and a practical
 ridden demonstration of the elected competition discipline. Orally assesses
 the requirements of horse care and management for the competition horse
 Structure and rider.
 of the
 A ridden test will be assessed for competency on an unknown horse in
 paper: walk, trot and canter, change of pace and lateral movements and a
 demonstration on a known horse of a competition discipline. Six oral
 questions are asked on the tack, nutrition, training and health relating to
 the competition horse. The rider submits a competition log of participatory
 events via either printed log records or DVD evidence.

CAPS 11
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 Practical
 Horsemastership (Non-Riding Option)
 Paper

 Time: 1 hour 30 minutes Total Marks: 100

 Assesses the ability to understand and apply knowledge of the complexities
 of horse care and management in one non-riding vocation in the Equine
 Industry.
 Structure A formal, oral presentation of the Non-Riding Practical Project will be
 of the assessed. The presentation must include a motivation for the choice of
 paper: vocation, the aim(s) of the project; research findings; practical activities
 undertaken; recommendations and reflections. Supporting documentation
 must be provided in the form of a Portfolio of Evidence/Visual Diary,
 including a completed log of 160 hours and all completed assessment tools.

 2. SCHOOL-BASED ASSESSMENT (SBA)

 All of the following SBA items must be done individually by learners. Each task must
 be set in a different topic.

 SBA Item Weighting
 Preliminary Examination 25%
 Controlled test 1 15%
 Controlled test 2 15%
 Research task 20%
 Case Study 15%
 Practical Task 10%
 TOTAL 100

12 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
C. INTERPRETATION OF REQUIREMENTS

 1. EXAMINATION

 1.1 Practical: Horsemanship (riding)

 Learners are required to:
 • demonstrate effective handling and safety techniques when tacking up a
 horse in the stable; mounting; altering stirrups; and dismounting.
 • demonstrate practical riding on an unknown horse, executing basic
 school movements on the flat including leg yielding and shoulder in;
 • ride their own or a known horse, at the learner's nominated competition
 discipline, at a level higher than novice in simulated competition
 requirements. For example: Dressage riders will be asked to ride
 Elementary Dressage Test number 1; Show jumpers will jump a
 gymnastic and a course of show jumps at a height of 1 m; Flat race
 jockeys will be assessed on the Equicise™ and talking the examiner
 through their ride in an official horserace; Endurance riders will be
 evaluated via video evidence of their ride preparations at a sanctioned
 event.
 • answer practical questions orally on topics relating to tack, nutrition,
 training and health care of the competition horse.
 • maintain a riding log of their participation in at least 4 competitions in
 their nominated discipline during their grade 12 year. These records
 must be signed by the supervisor/mentor or discipline secretary and the
 learner, and verified by the teacher.

 1.2 Practical: Horsemastership (non-riding)

 Learners are required to:
 • select one non-riding vocation in Equine Industry fields, such as Equine
 Welfare, Complimentary Health Care, Nutrition, Veterinary and para-
 veterinary, Stable Yard Management, Dentistry, Farriery or Breeding.
 • complete a Practical Project in the chosen vocation, comprising 160
 hours of activities. The activities must include secondary research (via
 books, magazine, internet etc.), primary research (via observations,
 interviews, investigations etc.), practical activities performed in real-life
 settings under supervised conditions, and reflections on experiences
 and own performance. If the school does not have the proper facilities
 for these activities, facilities nearby should be identified and used to
 complete the Project. The learners should work with Professional Body
 registered practitioners in their chosen vocation.
 • submit a Project Proposal to the Internal Moderator for approval by the
 end of October of their Grade 11 year (see Appendix F).
 • submit a Portfolio of Evidence/Visual Diary comprising evidence of all
 activities, including a log record for the 160 hours (see Appendix E),
 photographs and/or video clips, and all completed assessment tools.
 The hours logged include time spent doing supervised tasks, gathering,
 processing and presenting information, and reflecting.
 • make a formal oral presentation to the Teacher and Internal Moderator
 via PowerPoint and/or DVD. The presentation must include a motivation
 for the choice of vocation, the aim(s) of the Project; research findings;
 practical activities undertaken; recommendations and self-reflections.
 • answer questions orally during and/or after the presentation.

CAPS 13
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 The assessment of the activities must include appropriate and
 comprehensive checklists, memoranda and rubrics. The use of external
 assessors/supervisors must be approved by the teacher who should conduct
 on-site verification.

 The roles of the Teacher, Learner, School and Professional Practitioners
 in the Project must be clearly spelt out and relevant agreements signed
 where appropriate.

 2. THE ASSESSMENT SYLLABUS

 The purpose of this Assessment Syllabus is to assist IEB teachers in reaching a
 common understanding of the scope of the topics and therefore support schools in
 planning their teaching, learning and assessment programmes consistently, as well
 as to make the IEB examination and SBA requirements at grade 12 explicit for
 teachers, assessors and moderators.

 The document is not meant to be a teaching syllabus. Individual teachers and
 schools are not restricted to the contents of the Assessment Syllabus; they are free
 to expand on these in their own curriculum delivery. The teaching and learning
 programme should be rich, stimulating and challenging, while assessment is
 focused on the assessment requirements of the subject, in its contribution to the
 qualification.

 The Grade 10 and 11 assessment syllabi are included for information and
 guidance, but only the Grade 12 assessment syllabus is mandatory. However
 Equine Studies is a THREE year course and therefore learners should have an
 understanding of all terminology and concepts from previous grades where
 this forms the basis of work in the next grade(s).

 The Assessment Syllabus comprises the following topics. Topics 1–4 are
 compulsory. Learners choose either Topic 5A or 5B.
 1. Equine Nutrition
 2. Equine Anatomy and Physiology
 3. Equine Health Care
 4. Equine Stable Yard Management
 5. A. Horsemanship (Riding)
 OR
 B. Horsemastership (Non-Riding)

 The Assessment Syllabus follows after the SBA requirements.

 3. SCHOOL-BASED ASSESSMENT

 3.1 Preliminary Examination/Trial Paper (25 marks out of 100)

 This component must come from the last major summative
 assessment to have taken place before the Final NSC Examination
 period. The examination should mimic the external examination in its
 design, rigour and format.

14 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 3.2 Controlled Tests (two tests: each to count 15 out of 100)

 Controlled tests are written by the entire grade (preferably at the same
 time). These should count at least 50 marks each and must assess
 deeply within one Topic or across Topics. 60% of the marks should
 relate to lower order thinking skills (knowledge, comprehension and
 application) and 40% to higher order thinking skills (analysis,
 synthesis and evaluation).

 3.3 Tasks

 All tasks must be done individually by learners and each task must be set
 on a different topic in Equine Studies.

 (i) Research Task (20 marks out of 100)

 This task involves the gathering, processing and presenting of
 information related to a topic or research question from topics 1 to 4
 in the Grade 12 Assessment Syllabus. The research may be primary
 or secondary or mixed. Primary research involves the learners
 collecting their own data via experiments, observations,
 questionnaires or interviews; analysing and interpreting their data;
 and discussing their findings. Secondary research involves learners
 analysing and discussing the findings of others. Mixed research
 comprises a combination of both primary and secondary research.
 The findings may be presented in the form of a written or oral report.
 Teachers need to be vigilant regarding plagiarism and correct
 referencing methods. Teachers should assess the process
 undertaken by learners as well as the final report.
 (ii) Case Study (15 marks each out of 100)

 This task involves the study of a published real-life situation related to
 horses. Learners are required to analyse the provided case and
 present their interpretations and solutions, supported by reasoning
 and assumptions. The task must be completed under controlled
 conditions, in either one or two lessons, and count at least 50 marks.

 (iii) Practical Task (10 marks each out of 100)

 This task must be a practical activity done by the learner in a real-life
 setting. It must be set by the teacher and completed under controlled
 conditions by all learners at the same time. It may not be an activity
 that is done as part of the requirements for the riding and non-riding
 option (5A or 5B). If the school does not have the proper facilities,
 facilities nearby should be identified and used to complete the activity.

 The assessment of the activity m u s t include appropriate tools e.g.
 checklist, memorandum or rubric.

CAPS 15
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 Moderation at School Level

 It is expected that moderation of the assessment process has taken place at school
 level to ensure that assessment is valid, fair and reliable. This includes moderation
 of assessments before they are done by learners, moderation of the marking of the
 learner evidence by the teacher/assessor and checking of the calculations of
 learners' results. Evidence of this having taken place must be included in both the
 Teacher's and Learner's Files.

16 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 EQUINE STUDIES ASSESSMENT SYLLABUS

TOPIC 1: Equine Nutrition
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
Digestion Digestion Digestion
• Show a basic understanding of the digestive • Understand digestive anatomy from ingestion • Understand digestion and absorption of feed,
 system: to excretion e.g.:
 – Anatomy overview • Explain the anatomical factors that would – Mechanical, acid, enzyme and bacterial
 – Define Trickle feeder negatively influence the quality of nutrition digestion
 – Define Hindgut fermenter the horse would take in – Where digestion occurs
 • Quidding – Where breakdown products are absorbed
Feeding the horse • Condition of teeth • Explain the importance of gut microbes,
• Know 11 Golden rules of feeding roughage, prebiotics and probiotics.
• Recognise feed quality Feeding the horse • Understand detailed anatomy:
• Understand the condition score • Explain the purpose of the golden rules of – Function, size, physiology
 – Henneke system feeding – Peristalsis
• Identify different feed types • Understand the six classes of nutrients • Describe function and physiology of
 – Grain (maize, oats, barley, bran) – Protein accessory organs:
 – Roughage (erragrostis, teff, lucern, oat – Carbohydrates – Pancreas: exocrine and endocrine
 hay) – Fats function
 – Supplements e.g. molasses, salt lick, – Vitamins – Liver function
 electrolytes – Minerals – Bile: horse has no gall bladder.
 – Water
Conditions of gastro intestinal system Feeding the horse
• Define colic Conditions of gastro intestinal system • Analyse and prepare feeding plans according
• Understand types of colic • Explain causes of colic to the following requirements for purpose
 – Tympanic/gaseous • Describe signs and symptoms of colic – Age, environment, type and volume of
 – Obstructive • Know care protocols work, breed
 – Compacted • Explain and identify
 – Sand – concentrate to roughage ratio
 – Verminosus – Ca : P ratio
 – Foal – Percentage protein required
 – Physiological – Feeding relevance to Henneke condition
 score method

CAPS 17
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 • Understand specific feeding requirements
 protocols for purpose e.g.
 – Exertional Rhabdomyolysis
 – laminitis
 – starvation
 – obesity
 – pregnancy
 – colic
 – respiratory conditions
 – box rest

 Conditions of gastro intestinal system
 • Demonstrate an in depth understanding of
 the following conditions:
 – Colic
 – Ulcers
 – Choke
 – Millers disease

18 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

TOPIC 2: Equine Anatomy and Physiology
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
External structure External structure Conformation
• Know points of the horse • Demonstrate knowledge of scientific • Understand the relationship of conformation
 anatomical terminology e.g. defects to potential limb unsoundnesses
Conformation – Anterior, posterior • Identify and understand the other forms of
• Understand how to assess conformation – Cranial, caudal unsoundnesses, e.g.
• Understand the principals of correct – Rostral caudal – Wind
 conformation – Medial, lateral – Limb
 – Proximal, distal – Heart
The equine hoof and foot – Deep, superficial – Sight
• Know the basic anatomy – Dorsal, ventral
• Demonstrate the accepted procedure for The equine foot
 – Flexion, extension
 picking up both hind and front feet – Palmar, plantar • Understand anatomy, diseases, injuries and
 undesirable conditions of the hoof and foot
 – Adduction, abduction
Functional Systems: e.g. thrush, white line disease, abscesses,
 laminitis, sidebone, navicular, nail bind, nail
 • Describe identification methods for horses e.g. prick, corns, dropped sole, contracted heels,
1. Skeletal system – Passport, picture, microchip, DNA and
 • Describe the basic structure, function long toe low heel syndrome, flat feet, sheared
 blood typing, tattoo, hot branding and heels
 and type of bones freeze marking – Demonstrate knowledge of care and
 • Know axial and appendicular skeletons • Demonstrate common knowledge of breeds, management of diseases, injuries and
 types, colours and markings undesirable conditions of the foot
2. Muscular system
 – Describe a balanced foot
 • Describe basic smooth, cardiac and Conformation – Describe the function of the frog, sole and
 skeletal muscle • Recognise common structural faults heels
3. Cardiovascular system – Describe "break-over"
 The equine foot – Discuss conditions that would require
 • Understand the structure and function • Understand the daily care of the hoof and corrective shoeing
 of this system foot
 • Demonstrate a basic understanding of
4. Respiratory system farriery techniques and equipment
 • Understand the structure and function • Be able to debate "barefoot" versus shod
 of this system hooves.
 • Neuro and endocrine system
 • Understand the structure of the central,
 peripheral and Autonomic nervous
 systems

CAPS 19
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
6. Reproduction Functional Systems Functional Systems
 • Basic anatomy of the stallion and mare
 • Perineal conformation 1. Skeletal system 1. Skeletal
 • Gelding • Understand the structure and function • Demonstrate knowledge and
 • Understand gelding procedure, of synovial joints anatomical position of undesirable
 • Post-operative care of the gelded horse • Understand the structure and function conditions of bone and joints, e.g.
 • Understand complications of gelding, of tendons and ligaments – Splints, shin splints, ringbone,
 e.g. • Understand bone growth and repair bone spavin, kissing spine, side
 – cryptorchidism/rig bone
 – bleeding 2. Muscular system – Osteochondritis dissecans and
 • Understand the basic structure of degenerative joint disease
 muscles fibres
 – Compare Slow versus fast twitch • Discuss undesirable bursal and
 (high and low oxidative) synovial enlargements e.g.
 – Windgalls, thoroughpin, Curbs, bog
 3. Cardiovascular system spavin, capped elbow, capped
 • Describe the structure of the heart and hock, carpitis
 the cardiac cycle
 • Describe thermoregulation, (sweating, 2. Muscular
 anhydrosis, adaptation) • Identify basic major muscles, e.g.
 – Trapezius, gluteal, brachiocephalic,
 4. Respiratory system triceps, splenius, latissimus dorsi,
 • Describe ventilation during exercise longissimus dorsi
 (respiratory locomotary coupling) • Understand exertional rhabdomyolysis
 and, muscle atrophy
 5. Neuro and endocrine system • Identify the major tendons and
 • Demonstrate knowledge of the five ligaments below the knee, e.g.
 senses in the equine – Superficial digital flexor tendon
 – Deep digital flexor tendon
 6. Urogenital system – Common digital extensor tendon
 • Demonstrate a basic understanding of – Suspensory ligament
 the structure and function of kidneys, – Check ligaments (proximal and
 bladder, reproductive tract distal)
 • Recognise early signs renal failure • Describe care, management and
 recovery prognosis of tendon and
 ligament injuries

20 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 7. Reproduction 3. Cardiovascular
 • Gestation length • Demonstrate knowledge of the effects
 • Teasing and breeding methods of both exercise and rest on the normal
 • Parturition heart, relating to performance and
 – Indicators of readiness fitness
 – Three stages of parturition • Blood flow, pulse rate, diastolic and
 – Dystocia systolic
 – Red bag • Demonstrate knowledge of the possible
 – Post parturition haemorrhage defects of the heart that would affect
 exercise, performance and fitness
 – Murmur and Mitral valve
 insufficiencies
 – Coronary events
 – Understand the anatomy and
 function of the lymphatic system
 – Describe defects of the lymphatic
 system e.g.
 Stocking up/filled legs,
 Lymphangitis

 4. Respiratory
 • Demonstrate knowledge of the
 anatomy of the lung and the process of
 gaseous exchange
 • Describe basic anaerobic and aerobic
 cellular respiration.
 • Describe the relationship between
 muscle fibre type, exercise for purpose
 and cellular respiration
 • Recognise respiratory distress
 • Understand undesirable conditions and
 remedies for them
 – Roaring/laryngeal hemiplegia,
 Dorsal displacement of the soft
 palate, Recurrent Airway Disease,
 Exercise induced pulmonary
 haemorrhage.

CAPS 21
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 5. Neuro and endocrine system
 • Understand undesirable conditions e.g.
 – Cushing's
 – Wobbler
 6. Neuro and endocrine system
 • Mare
 – Physiology (mares hormonal cycle)
 • Stallion
 – Physiology (stallion hormonal cycle)
 • The Foal after birth
 – Identify the healthy foal
 – Recognise unhealthy conditions
 o Failure of passive transfer
 o Dummy foal
 o Retained placenta
 o Joint ill

22 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

TOPIC 3: Equine Health Care
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
History of the horses development Common diseases Common diseases
• Understand evolution and scientific Recognise symptoms of common diseases • Demonstrate knowledge of disease
 classification • African Horse sickness prevention
• Understand adaptation to climatic conditions • Tetanus – Understand vaccination program
• Describe domestication of the horse • Influenza – Understand isolation protocols
 • Rabies
Common diseases • Strangles • Understand diseases of the Skin
• List common diseases in South Africa that • Westnile – mudfever, melanomas, sarcoids,
 may affect horses papilloma, sweet itch, urticaria
 • Encephalosis
 – African Horse sickness • Herpes
 – Tetanus Parasites
 • Botulism • Ability to design and implement a de-worming
 – Influenza
 – Rabies • biliary protocol
 – Strangles Parasites – Prevention, method and control
 – Westnile • Understand external parasites: ticks, flies,
 – Encephalosis Dentition
 mites, fungus,
 • Know categories and function of Teeth and
 – Herpes • Understand Internal parasites, helmininths, demonstrate the ability to age
 – Botulism bots, (including but not limited to, small
 – Biliary • Understand conditions relating to dentition
 strongyles, large strongyles, tapeworm, pin
 – Wolf teeth
• Understand the difference between bacteria, worm, roundworms) and their lifecycles
 – Sharp enamel edges
 virus, parasite, fungal
 Equine first aid – Quidding
Equine first aid • Recognise wound types – Tooth abscesses
 • Identify wounds that require veterinary – Overbite and underbite
• Know normal ranges for Temperature, pulse, • Understand dental routine and when to call
 respiration intervention
 the dentist
 – T = 37.5 – 38.5 °C • Manage wound healing
 – P = 28 – 42 BPM Equine welfare
 – R = 10 – 15 BPM • Know Five freedoms of the horse
• Recognise other health and wellbeing • Awareness of Animal Protection Acts
 measurements (Powers of seizure)
 – Capillary refill time, skin tenting, colour of • Euthanasia
 mucous membranes

CAPS 23
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
• State the signs of ill health, e.g.
 – Discharge from eyes and nose
 – Ears - parasite infestation
 – Excessive drinking and urination
 – Appearance of coat
 – General body language
 – Signs of dehydration
 – Signs of worm infestation

Limb unsoundness
• Define lameness of limb
• Explain movement (paces/footfall sequence)

24 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

TOPIC 4: Equine Stable Yard Management
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
Grooming and turnout Lunging Travel and trucking
• Know grooming equipment and demonstrate • Demonstrate lunging a trained horse without • Know AHS movement restrictions and
 their use gadgets with a lunging cavesson legislation
• Demonstrate Plaiting (manes and tails) • Demonstrate knowledge of practical travel
• Describe trimming and clipping techniques Advanced tack requirements (feeding and watering, loading
• Describe trimming and clipping types • Identify types and demonstrate fit of bits and e.g. single horse in double birth, difficult to
 bridles other than snaffles. load, protective wear)
Blankets and boots • Identify types of saddles other than general • Know vehicle checks and license
• Identify types and demonstrate fit of both purpose saddle requirements
 blankets and boots • Understand travel sickness
 Stable vices
Tack • Understand and explain the cause and Pasture management
• Identify types and general use prevention of stable vices e.g.
 • Understand rotation of pastures and handling
• Demonstrate fit of snaffle bit, bridle and – box walking, weaving, kicking, biting, manure on pasture
 general purpose saddle wood chewing, wind sucking, crib biting,
 • Identify the following veld plants toxic to
 rug tearing
 equines in South Africa and give one
Yard management example of their toxic effect
• Describe a basic daily stable yard routine Horse psychology
 • Understand the herd nature and hierarchy of
 – Senicio
• Describe manure management and disposal
 – Brakenfern
• Describe stable yard, paddock and arena horses
 • Understand horse body language – Datura
 design
 – Monkey rope
Risk Management Yard management – Thorn apple
• Know how to analyse safe working conditions • Manage general health, hygiene and vermin – Mienie-Mienie bean
 around a stable yard, e.g. control for a stable yard – Blue green algae
 – Tidy yard – Honey bush
 – Appropriate clothing Risk management • Name maintenance items to checks for in the
 – Appropriate facilities • Understand how to develop emergency yard paddock and arena
 plans e.g.
 – Fire
 – Flood
 • Human first aid

CAPS 25
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 Yard management
 • Know where to source relevant compliance
 regulations/legislation for running a stable yard
 – Occupational health and safety
 regulations (OHS)
 – Labour regulations
 – Tax regulations, income tax, PAYE, VAT,
 record keeping
 – Insurance requirements (COIDA –
 workman's compensation, UIF, public
 liability, personal accident)
 – Municipal regulations
 • Demonstrate the need for record keeping
 with regards to
 – Vaccination schedules
 – Dentist visits
 – Farrier visits
 – Worming protocol
 – Incident register
 – Diet and supplement records

26 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

TOPIC 5A: Horsemanship (Riding proficiency)
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
Demonstrate
• Fitting a saddle, bridle and ancillary tack to • Rider and mount/s are presented riding • Rider and mount/s are presented riding
 a horse for riding ready by learner ready by learner
• Mounting and dismounting • Demonstrate riding in a recognised • Demonstrate riding in a recognised
• Walk, trot and canter on a known horse in competition discipline of choice at novice competition discipline of choice at level
 an arena with and without stirrups. level higher than novice
• Knowledge of riding out of enclosed spaces • Maintain a verified log of competition riding, • Maintain a verified log of competition riding,
 in company in the discipline of choice, in at least four in the discipline of choice, in at least four
• Knowledge of road safety competitive events at novice level or higher competitive events higher than novice level
• Maintain a log of personal riding • Demonstrate the ability to handle and ride at
 least two unknown horses on the flat
 • Demonstrate the ability to discuss nutrition,
 training, tack, health and rules relevant to
 discipline

CAPS 27
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12

TOPIC 5B: Horsemastership (Non-Riding)
 Grade 10 Grade 11 Grade 12
Three vocations from the Equine Industry fields One vocation from the Equine Industry fields One vocation from the Equine Industry fields
below are chosen by the learner at the start of below is chosen by the learner at the start of below is chosen by the learner during the
grade 10. grade 11. course of grade 11. The vocation may not be
• Equine Welfare • Equine Welfare the same as that chosen for grade 11.
• Equine Physiotherapy • Equine Physiotherapy • Equine Welfare
• Equine Farriery • Equine Farriery • Equine Physiotherapy
• Equine Dentistry • Equine Dentistry • Equine Farriery
• Complementary equine therapies • Complementary equine therapies • Equine Dentistry
• Equine Veterinary/para-veterinary practices • Equine Veterinary/para-veterinary practices • Complementary equine therapies
• Equine Breeding • Equine Breeding • Equine Veterinary/para-veterinary practices
• Equine Nutrition • Equine Nutrition • Equine Breeding
• Stable Yard Management • Stable Yard Management • Equine Nutrition
• Investigate each vocation as a career • Complete a Practical Project in the chosen • Stable Yard Management
 choice by conducting: secondary research vocation, comprising 160 hours of activities. • Complete a Practical Project in the chosen
 (via books, magazine, internet etc.); primary The activities must include secondary vocation, comprising 160 hours of activities.
 research (via observations, interviews, research (via books, magazine, internet The activities must include secondary
 investigations etc.); practical activities etc.), primary research (via observations, research (via books, magazine, internet
 performed in real-life settings; and self- interviews, investigations etc.), practical etc.), primary research (via observations,
 reflection on research findings. activities performed in real-life settings interviews, investigations etc.), practical
 under supervised conditions, and reflections activities performed in real-life settings
 on experiences and own performance. The under supervised conditions, and reflections
 learners should work with Professional Body on experiences and own performance. The
 registered practitioners in their chosen learners should work with Professional Body
 vocation. registered practitioners in their chosen
 • Submit a Portfolio of Evidence/Visual Diary vocation.
 comprising evidence of all activities, • Submit a Project Proposal to the Internal
 including a log record for the 160 hours (see Moderator: Equine Studies for approval by
 Appendix E), photographs and/or video the end of October of the Grade 11 year
 clips, and all completed assessment tools. (see Appendix F).
 The hours logged include time spent doing • Submit a Portfolio of Evidence/Visual Diary
 supervised tasks, gathering, processing and comprising evidence of all activities,
 presenting information, and reflecting. including a log record for the 160 hours (see
 • Make a formal oral presentation to the Appendix E), photographs and/or video
 Teacher via PowerPoint and/or DVD. The clips, and all completed assessment tools.

28 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 presentation must include a motivation for The hours logged include time spent doing
 the choice of vocation, the aim(s) of the supervised tasks, gathering, processing and
 Project; research findings; practical activities presenting information, and reflecting.
 undertaken; recommendations and self- • Make a formal oral presentation to the
 reflections. Teacher via PowerPoint and/or DVD. The
 • Answer questions orally during and/or after presentation must include a motivation for
 the presentation. the choice of vocation, the aim(s) of the
 Project; research findings; practical activities
 undertaken; recommendations and self-
 reflections.
 • Answer questions orally during and/or after
 the presentation.

CAPS 29
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
D. ADMINISTRATIVE DOCUMENTS AND APPENDICES

 1. ADMINISTRATIVE DOCUMENTATION FOR SBA

 1.1 Teacher's SBA File Cover Sheet

 1.2 Candidate's SBA File Cover Sheet

 1.3 Teacher's Record of SBA Marks

 1.4 SBA Rank-Order Sheet

 1.5 Regional and National Moderation Tool

 1.6 Final Moderation Feedback Form to IEB

 1.7 Example of Letter of Authenticity

 1.8 Example of Declaration of Omissions

 2. APPENDICES

 2.1 Appendix A: Example of Design Grid

 2.2 Appendix B: Bloom's Taxonomy of Cognitive Demand

 2.3 Appendix C: Equestrian Competition Disciplines

 2.4 Appendix D: Horsemanship Log Record

 2.5 Appendix E: Horsemastership Log Record

 2.6 Appendix F: Suggested Template for Horsemastership Project Proposal

CAPS 30
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
1.1 TEACHER'S SBA FILE COVER SHEET

 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
 EQUINE STUDIES
 COVER SHEET FOR TEACHER'S FILE

School:

Teacher's Name:

SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION Evidence provided

 1 Teacher's Record of SBA Marks

 2 Rank Order List for ALL Learners in the grade

 3 Evidence of School (or External if one person department) Moderation

EVIDENCE OF SBA ITEMS
This Section must contain:
• All assessments done by learners.
• Design grids for the exams and tests
• Marking Guidelines for each assessment (Memoranda, Rubrics, etc.)

Preliminary Examination

Controlled Test 1

Controlled Test 2

Research Task

Case Study

Practical Task

31 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
1.2 CANDIDATE'S SBA FILE COVER SHEET

 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
 EQUINE STUDIES
 COVER SHEET FOR LEARNER'S FILE

 (To be filled in by the candidate and controlled by the teacher)

Centre Number Candidate's Examination number

 Weighted Final
 No Item Date Raw Score
 Mark

 1 Prelim Exam
 /25
 2 Controlled Test 1
 /15
 Controlled Test 2
 /15
 4 Research Task
 /20
 5 Case Study
 /15
 6 Practical Task
 /10

 Total (100)

Educator signature: ____________________ Learner signature: ____________________

Date: ________________ Date: _________________

CAPS 32
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
1.3 TEACHER'S RECORD OF SBA MARKS

 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
 EQUINE STUDIES
 TEACHER'S RECORD OF SBA MARKS

 PRELIMINARY CASE
 CONTROLLED TESTS RESEARCH TASK PRACTICAL TASK TOTAL
EXAM NO. NAME EXAMINATION STUDY
 25 15 15 20 15 10 100

Signature of Teacher: __________________ Date: ______________

Signature of Principal: __________________ Date: ______________

33 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
1.4 SBA RANK-ORDER SHEET

 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
 EQUINE STUDIES
 SBA RANK ORDER LIST

 CENTRE NO

CANDIDATES LISTED IN RANK ORDER OF MARKS (HIGHEST TO LOWEST)

EXAMINATION NUMBER MARK – 100

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

CAPS 34
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
1.5 REGIONAL AND NATIONAL MODERATION TOOL

 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
 EQUINE STUDIES
 NATIONAL MODERATION TOOL

 SCHOOL DATE

 TEACHER'S NAME CENTRE NO:

 MODERATOR

 Completed IEB Selection List Mark Schedule Completed Rank Proof of Irregularities clearly
 Teacher's SBA included Order List included School/External documented (if
 Cover Sheet completed correctly Moderation provided applicable)
 included (if applicable) and signed by the
 Compliance

 Principal

 This row applies to Suitable file used Completed and Declaration of Declaration of
 Learner's SBA only correct Learner's Authenticity Omissions provided
 SBA Cover Sheet provided (if applicable)
 included

35 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
 Rating Scale

 1. Does not meet the requirements at all. 2. Some important omissions. 3. Some minor omissions. 4. Meets the requirements fully.

 Task of required
 question papers

 Appropriate and

 against marking
 to justify design
 Completed Grid

 clear Marking

 Constructive
 instructions/

 assessment

 feedback to
 Consistent
 Guidelines
 Evidence of …

 guidelines
 provided

 learners
 Comments with regards to compliance with SAGs

 rigour
 Preliminary Clear
 Examination

 Controlled Test 1
 Quality

 Controlled Test 2

 Research Task

 Case Study

 Practical Task

Moderator's Signature: ___________________________________ Date: ________________

CAPS 36
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
1.6 FINAL MODERATION FEEDBACK FORM TO IEB

 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
 EQUINE STUDIES
 FINAL MODERATION FEEDBACK FORM
 To be completed and retained by the IEB

Examination Centre Number: _________________

The candidates required to submit Learner Files for moderation (candidates supplied by IEB)

 Examination number School Moderated
 Mark (%) Mark (%)

Comments:

Recommendations:

 Yes No
 SBA MARKS SHOULD BE ACCEPTED WITHOUT ALTERATION

 Change recommended by moderator:

 Change to be implemented:

SBA Moderator's signature Date:

37 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
1.7 EXAMPLE OF LETTER OF AUTHENTICITY

 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
 EQUINE STUDIES
 LETTER OF AUTHENTICITY

 School Letterhead

DECLARATION BY THE CANDIDATE

I hereby declare that all the work contained in this SBA is my own, original work and that if
I have made use of any source, I have acknowledged this.

__________________________________ _____________________

LEARNER NAME DATE

I agree that, if it is determined by the competent authorities that I have engaged in any fraudulent
activities whatsoever in connection with the contents of my SBA, I shall forfeit completely the
marks gained for this assessment.

_____________________ _____________________

LEARNER NAME DATE

DECLARATION BY THE CANDIDATE'S TEACHER

As far as I know, the above statement by the candidate is true and I accept that the work offered is
his/hers.

__________________________________ _____________________

TEACHER DATE

CAPS 38
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
1.8 EXAMPLE OF DECLARATION OF OMISSIONS

 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
 EQUINE STUDIES
 DECLARATION OF OMISSIONS
 To be included in place of a missing SBA piece

 SCHOOL LETTERHEAD

Learner Name: ___________________________________ Grade: _______________

SBA Task: ____________________________________________________________

The learner has failed to include the set SBA task for the following reason:

 Illness.
 Doctor's note attached.
 The completed task is lost, but a mark is recorded.

 Absenteeism.
 I hereby acknowledge the fact that I have failed to report on an alternate date to
 complete my Equine Studies SBA Task. This means I will receive 0% for the task. I
 am completely to blame for my own failure to complete the task on time or not at
 all.

 Failed to hand in the task.
 I hereby acknowledge the fact that I have failed to hand in an Equine Studies SBA
 Task. This means I will receive 0% for the task. I am completely to blame for my
 own failure to hand in the task on time or not at all.

 Other:

The learner will have the following assessment reflected on the mark sheet for the task ______

_______________________________________ __________________
Teacher's Signature DATE

_______________________________________ __________________
Learner's Signature DATE

39 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
2.1. APPENDIX A: EXAMPLE OF A DESIGN GRID

 EQUINE STUDIES DESIGN GRID

 Topics (insert  in appropriate column) Cognitive Levels (insert marks)
 Question
 Nutrition Anatomy and Health Care Stable Yard 1 2 3 4 5 6
 Number
 Physiology Management
 25% 15% 15% 10% 15% 15%

 TOTALS
 TARGET
 60% 40%
 WEIGHTING
 ACTUAL
 WEIGHTING

CAPS 40
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
2.2 APPENDIX B: BLOOM'S TAXONOMY OF COGNITIVE DEMAND

 BLOOM'S TAXONOMY OF COGNITIVE DEMAND

 Level Description Explanation Skills demonstrated Action verbs
 6 Evaluation Making judgments Compare and discriminate between ideas; Assess, decide, rank, grade, test, measure,
 based on certain criteria assess value of theories, presentations; make recommend, convince, select, judge, explain,
 choices based on reasoned arguments; verify discriminate, support, conclude, compare,
 value of evidence; recognise subjectivity summarise, critique, interpret, justify.
 5 Synthesis The ability to put Use old ideas to create new ones, generalise Combine, integrate, modify, rearrange, substitute,
 elements together to from given facts, relate knowledge from plan, create, design, invent, what if? Compose,
 form a new whole several areas, predict, draw conclusions formulate, prepare, generalise, rewrite,
 categorise, combine, compile, reconstruct
 4 Analysis The ability to break Seeing patterns, organisation of parts, Analyse, separate, order, explain, connect,
 down a whole into its recognition of hidden meanings, and classify, arrange, divide, compare, select, infer,
 component parts. identification of components. break down, contrast, distinguish, diagram,
 Elements embedded in a illustrate
 whole are identified and
 the relations among the
 elements are recognised
 3 Application The ability to use (or Use information, use methods, concepts, Apply, demonstrate, calculate, complete, illustrate,
 apply) information in theories in new situations, solve problems show, solve, examine, modify, relate, change,
 new situations using required skills or knowledge classify, experiment, discover, construct,
 manipulate, prepare, produce
 2 Comprehension First level of Understanding information, grasp meaning, Summarise, describe, interpret, contrast, predict,
 understanding, recall translate knowledge into new context, associate, distinguish, estimate, differentiate,
 and understand interpret facts, compare, contrast, order, discuss, extend, comprehend, convert, defend,
 information, describe group, infer causes, predict consequences explain, generalise, give example, rewrite
 meaning
 1 Knowledge Act of remembering Observation and recall of information List, define, tell, describe, identify, show, know,
 facts. Only recall label, collect, select, reproduce, match, recognise,
 examine, tabulate, quote, name

41 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
2.3 APPENDIX C: EQUESTRIAN COMPETITION DISCIPLINES

 Flat Racing Carriage Driving Western Mounted Games

 Show Jumping Endurance Western Dressage

 Dressage Polo Horse Ball

 Para Dressage Polocrosse TREC

 Eventing Tentpegging Horseback Archery

 Showing Saddle Seat Harness Racing

 Equitation Pony Club Mounted Games

 Vaulting Reining

CAPS 42
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
2.4 APPENDIX D: EQUINE STUDIES – TOPIC 5A – HORSEMANSHIP LOG RECORD Year: _________________

 Name: ___________________________________ School: ________________________Discipline: ________________________________

 Competition Evidence e.g. Video; Photograph;
 Date Event Venue Description of Event Result
 Level/Grade Published results

43 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
2.5 APPENDIX E: EQUINE STUDIES – TOPIC 5B – HORSEMASTERSHIP LOG RECORD Year: _________________

 Name: ___________________________________ School: ________________________ Vocation: ________________________________

 Hours
 Date Task Description of Duty Name of Responsible Person Signature of Responsible Person
 Worked

CAPS 44
 EQUINE STUDIES GRADES 10–12
2.6 APPENDIX F: EQUINE STUDIES – TOPIC 5B – HORSEMASTERSHIP – SUGGESTED TEMPLATE FOR PROJECT PROPOSAL

 EQUINE STUDIES: HORSEMASTERSHIP PROJECT PROPOSAL Date:

Name: _________________________________________ School: ________________________________________________________

Vocation: ______________________________________ CEEPSA Registered Practitioner(s): _________________________________

Motivation:
Why I have chosen this field and this
vocation
What I aim to accomplish over the 160
hours
What I want to learn

Activities: Where I will do When I will do How I will do the Why I will do the What evidence I
What activities I intend to do: the activity the activity activity activity will provide

1
2
3
4
5
etc.

CAPS 45