1|Page
2017 Guidelines to Strengthen the Implementation of CAPS (FET)
 Introduction ................................................................................................................ 3
1. ACCOUNTING................................................................................................. 4
2. ARTS SUBJECTS ........................................................................................... 5
3. BUSINESS STUDIES .................................................................................... 21
4. COMPUTER APPLICATIONS TECHNOLOGY ............................................. 25
5. CONSUMER STUDIES ................................................................................. 26
6. ECONOMICS................................................................................................. 32
7. GEOGRAPHY................................................................................................ 34
8. HISTORY ....................................................................................................... 35
9. HOSPITALITY STUDIES ............................................................................... 36
10. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.................................................................... 40
11. LANGUAGES ................................................................................................ 41
12. LIFE ORIENTATION...................................................................................... 42
13. LIFE SCIENCES ............................................................................................ 44
14. MATHEMATICAL LITERACY ........................................................................ 45
15. MATHEMATICS............................................................................................. 46
16. PHYSICAL SCIENCES .................................................................................. 46
17. RELIGION STUDIES ..................................................................................... 47
18. TECHNICAL MATHEMATICS ....................................................................... 49
19. TECHNICAL SCIENCES ............................................................................... 50
20. TOURISM ...................................................................................................... 51

 2|Page
2017 Guidelines to Strengthen the Implementation of CAPS (FET)
 The Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS) is a single,
comprehensive, and concise document developed for all subjects listed in the
National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 and replaced the various policy
documents, such as the Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and
Subject Assessment Guidelines.

Although the CAPS have been commended for its clarity and sequence of the
content; teachers have raised concerns on the complexity of implementing its
Section Four (4). Section 4 of the CAPS, meant to provide guidance on how to
conduct both formal and informal assessment activities.

The ensuing guidelines were developed by subject teams, in consultation with
provinces, in order to respond to the challenges raised on Section 4. In each subject
contained, the teams developed guidelines to assist teachers to effectively
implement Section 4 focusing on grades 10 and 11 in 2017.

The guidelines are intended to strengthen Section 4 of the CAPS. The guidelines will
be in place until policy has been amended and promulgated. However, immediate
implementation of the guidelines is strongly advised.

 3|Page
2017 Guidelines to Strengthen the Implementation of CAPS (FET)
 Reduction of Allocated Time:

Grade 10 – Term 1: Reduce time allocated to teach Indigenous Knowledge Systems
teach to 1 week and increase time for other topics that require more time in Term 1.
This will improve curriculum coverage.

Sequencing of content

Grade 11

Term 1:
  Partnerships taught up to final accounts. Introduce financial statements of
 Partnerships.

Term 2:
  Begin with financial statements (week1 – 2) then analysis and interpretation of
 Partnership financial statements (week 3 -5)
  Time allocated for sports clubs will be reduced from 4 to 2 weeks (week 6 – 7)

Term 3:
  Allocations should be: Cost Accounting 4 weeks (Week 1-4);
  Budgeting 3 weeks (Week 5-7); and
  Inventory systems 2 weeks (week 8-9).

 4|Page
2017 Guidelines to Strengthen the Implementation of CAPS (FET)
 1.1. DANCE STUDIES, DESIGN, DRAMATIC ARTS, MUSIC, & VISUAL ARTS

 RECOMMENDATIONS

All Arts Subjects Grade 10 and 11 candidates:
  Must be given considerations as Term 4 is taken up with all subjects’ final
 examinations
  Term 3 should not include additional curriculum coverage as the Arts complete a
 Practical Examination and a Theory Examination in the prelims, whilst they still have
 to do the final Practical Examination.
  Curriculum Coverage should be in Term 1 and Term 2. The 3rd Term should be
 devoted to Prelims and final Practical Exams, with Term 4 reserved for all the final
 Examinations.
  Both School-Based Assessment and the Practical Assessment Task components
 must include a mark awarded for each Assessment Task and a consolidated mark.
  The PAT components must be taken out of the SBA and recorded separately, giving
 the required weighting of 25%.
  There must be a strong practical aspect and the SBA must include both Practical
 and Theory aspects.
  The PAT is to comprise 25% of the Examination Mark, whilst all Arts Subjects
 should be as follows:
 Exam Exam
 SBA PAT
 Practical Theory
 100 100 100 100

 Total Marks 400

 5
  The Cognitive levels for Dance Studies be adjusted to:
 L1:30% L2: 40% L3: 30%, so as to be in alignment with all other Arts Subjects.
 Constitute the Dance Studies Prescribed Materials Committee, and provide
 reviewed Prescribed Dance-works list (including Indigenous African Dance-
 works).
 Suggests that pg. 9 is amended to: The curriculum although written to include
 3 most popular dance forms, may not be limited to and include: Ballroom; Latin
 American; Tap; Jazz; Indian; Spanish; Greek and other popular dance forms as
 in Hip Hop and Contemporary Freestyle provided they meet the rigour as that
 displayed by the dance forms outlined in the curriculum.

Grade 10 and 11

ARCHITECTURE
 The CAPS document requires study of Classical as in Ancient (Indigenous) and
 Contemporary but more guidance is needed to include 3D art (CAPS only
 concentrates on Stadiums and Amphitheatres). There are too similar concepts as
 in Visual Arts. Classical movements must be removed.
DESIGN MOVEMENTS
 Grade 11 should exclude all the grade 10 movements. In the trial exam paper
 and final paper, the focus should only be on grade 11 movements. There are too
 similar concepts as in Visual Arts.
DESIGNERS
 A prescribed list of designers to be studied in Grades 10 and 11, candidates can
 then be given a choice to study additional designers so as to broaden their scope
 of knowledge.
 A suggested list of new, interesting designers should be provided together with
 the categories that they belong in. This would alleviate confusion in some
 schools.
 CAPS should allow the freedom to add and adjust the basic list.

 6
 RETROSPECTIVE EXHIBITION
 Provide Guidelines for the PAT Retrospective/Retrograde Exhibition

 Remark the Retrospective as a whole body of work.

 Involvement and feedback to teacher is vital. Allow for table top exhibitions. Part
 of the holistic mark should be either be:
 a) A mark of a candidate’s PATS or
 b) Teacher must also mark together with the moderators and combine marks.

 Move the date of the retrospective to end of term 2 after PAT examination has
 been completed or beginning of term 3. Only term 1 and term 2 projects should
 be taken to exhibit. Term 3 is too busy. Term 1 and 2 also have a Business task
 that should be more in line with weighting of the practical.

 During the retrospective exhibition, candidates may set up their exhibition in a
 form of a Window display or Advert or Promotion. The moderator will then
 mark this ‘promotion’ or ‘campaign’ as the weighing is 20% of the retrospective
 mark (i.e. the business component of the exhibition) and is well in line with the
 rest of the weighing of the practical tasks.

 The retrospective exhibition as an opportunity for a learner to showcase their
 years’ work and that the exhibition should be entirely their own efforts. This is a
 vital skill to learn as on a first year university level they are required to set up an
 exhibition of their years’ work as well. It should be an opportunity for the school
 community to view their work.

MODERATION
A standardised internal moderation rubric should be designed.

 7
 NB. SEE THE SUGGESTED RUBRIC BELOW

WORKING MARKSHEETS

 A standardised Annual Working Mark sheet should be designed so as to put to
 an end to all the confusion in all the schools around various Mark-sheet options.

DESIGN IN A BUSINESS CONTEXT

 A standardized rubric should be developed, with level descriptors drawn up to
 specify exactly how educators need to mark to avoid personal and own
 interpretation in marking. This to be brought back into the Theory Topic 3 and
 learners to be examined on this section.

 This portion to be re-incorporated into Theory. This portion to be a written
 assignment of out of 50 marks rather than 10 marks. CAPS (p 47) must indicate
 that it counts out of 50 and then converted to 10 as nowhere in the document is it
 indicated as out of ‘50’. That the area of study per term be linked to the actual
 practical work for that term.

 Learners must concentrate on their entrepreneurial skills and motivate (through
 research) how to promote their own products instead of writing a CV (Business
 task for term 2).

 During the retrospective exhibition, the focus may be highlighted in ‘promoting’
 the product. The moderator will then consider a new mark for the ‘advertising’ of
 the product.

 The SBA should not include PATs and should have tests and examinations
 including practical tests and exams.

 PATs must be recorded separately.

 8
 • Take the PATs out of the SBA and reduce the SBA to a mark /700 which must be
 converted to /100
• The PAT mark should be /100, thus reducing the Practical Exam to /100 and the
 Theory exam converted to /100

The SBA should comprise of no PATS SBA Grade 10 & 11:
 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4
 Test Exam June Exam Prelim Final
 Theory Practical 150 Practical 150 Examinations
 50 Marks and Theory 150 and Theory 150
 Test
 Theory from
 Term 3
 50 Marks

The 3 PATs should be condensed into only 2 and the 3 rd PAT should be same as
other subjects ( See Visual Arts and Design)
Then = 700 converted 100

There must be;

 3 PATs (One per Term: Concert Performance; Improvisation; Composition and
 Arrangement.

1. Tasks to be included in the SBA:
 • PAT 2 Music Literacy Assignment
 • PAT 5 Written Assignment.

2. The breakdown would then be SBA;
 • 2 written assignment (50 marks x2)
 • Examinations = 700 marks converted to mark /100.
 • The 3 PATS (3x 50 marks) converted /100
 • The Practical and Theory Examinations convert each to a mark/100 each.

 9
 Grade 10

a) Term 1: Guide teachers to focus on the different drawing techniques (for
 example, Working with pencils/graphite – (smooth shading), Pen – (ballpoint pen
 – scribbling and hatching), Fine liner – (Stippling) and lastly working with colour
 pencils – (different methods of working in colour pencils and the different
 blending techniques).
b) Guidance to teachers to do a brief that encompass these techniques must be
 provided. The text book for art as used by many of the schools, have these
 techniques in them, but during moderation of grade 10 and 11, these techniques
 are done far too quickly, just for the sake of doing them and that it is not used in a
 final practical work.
c) Term2: Should be spent doing a painting. Use oil/acrylic paints although acrylics
 is challenging due to limited time, oil gives a learner more time to create smooth
 and realistic looking end results. Learners can be taught on a step by step
 process from creating an under painting too the whites which is finally applied.
d) Term 3: Spent on Printmaking, using Lino as a medium.
e) Term 4: After completing period of working on learning with different medium,
 learners have the choice of working in one of these mediums done throughout
 the year to create an artwork for a 24 hour exam which is set during the final term
 4 exam schedules.
Grade 11
a) Term 1: Teachers might start off with Printmaking for continuation of what was
 learnt in grade 10 – exploring etching (dry point etching on plexi glass).
b) Term 2: A sculpture project exploring different sculpture techniques. This should
 be picking up from what was learned during Creative Arts.
c) Term 3: Creating a mixed media artwork using unconventional materials.
 Learners may not use conventional art mediums to challenge their creativity and
 innovation.
d) Term 4: Learners may use one of the techniques they have done from grade 10
 or 11 for a 24 hour exam, timetabled during the final exam period. It is vital that
 learners should be exposed to the 24 hour exam in preparation for the prelim and
 also the final 24 hour exam for grade 12.

 10
 RETROSPECTIVE EXHIBITION
 Provide Guidelines for the PAT Retrospective/Retrograde Exhibition
 Remark the Retrospective as a whole body of work.
 Involvement and feedback to teacher is vital. Allow for table top exhibitions. Part
 of the holistic mark should be either be:
 a) A mark of learner’s PATS or
 b) Teacher must also mark together with the moderators and combine marks.

 Move the date of the retrospective to end of term 2 after PAT examination has
 been completed or beginning of term 3. Only term 1 and term 2 projects should
 be taken to exhibit. Term 1 and 2 also have a Business task and will be more in
 line with weighting of the practical.

 During the retrospective exhibition, learners may set up their exhibition in a form
 of a Window display or Advert or Promotion. The moderator will then mark
 this ‘promotion’ or ‘campaign’ as the weighing is 20% of the retrospective mark
 (i.e. the business component of the exhibition) and is well in line with the rest of
 the weighing of the practical tasks.

 The retrospective exhibition is an opportunity for a learner to showcase their
 years’ work and that the exhibition should be entirely their own efforts. This is a
 vital skill to learn as on a first year university level they are required to set up an
 exhibition of their years’ work as well. It should be an opportunity for the school
 community to view their work.

Process drawings
 There process drawing should be over and above those that are forming part of
 the research, experimentation and investigation. There should be full tonal
 drawing of the concept. The process drawing should match the rigour of an A3
 size page.

 11
  Dance Studies to take “Improvisation” out of the final practical and replace with a
 second solo
 Music to reduce 3 solos and one ensemble to 2 solos and one ensemble
 Dramatic Arts to remain with 3 pieces although not providing any technical
 development exercises as the other two subjects.

PAPER 2: Practical Examination (Topics 1 and 2)
The examination question paper consists of
TOPIC 1 (Process-book/ Sourcebook) and TOPIC 2 (the Artwork).
TIME:
TOPIC 1: Conceptualising at school and/or home during the Third Term.
TOPIC 2: Final artwork done under controlled conditions only at school for a maximum of 24
 hours.
HAND OUT: Will be stipulated by DBE.
DUE DATE: Will be stipulated by DBE.
 The practical examination is set by DBE.
 NOTE: The maximum duration for the entire practical exam process will be stated on the
 National practical Paper 2. Provinces will make all the arrangements after they have
 received the final examination timetable from the Department of Basic Education. This
 means communication to examiners and anyone else concerned needs to be done in the
 management of the practical examinations for Grade 10-11.
 The theme will be a wide and open-ended theme to cater for diverse solution in the
 different specialisation disciplines.
 Specialised options include drawing, painting, sculpture, printmaking, multi-media work,
 photography, ceramic sculpture, installations, new media work, photography, et cetera.
 As Topic 1(Conceptualising) has the same weighting as Topic 2 (The artwork), it should
 be given enough time to acknowledge its importance.
 The teacher may be involved in this preliminary preparatory session. Due to the
 preparatory nature of Topic 1, learners are allowed to also work at home.

 12
  All Topic 1 work may be completed and ready before the commencement of the Topic 2
 examination work. Learners may use the Topic 1 sourcebook as a point of reference
 during their Topic 2 examination. Both Topic 1 and Topic 2 examination work must be
 submitted to the examination officer/teacher immediately after the Topic 2 examination is
 completed. This date will be stipulated by each province in an official letter.
 The teacher is NOT to assist the candidate IN ANY WAY during the final production of the
 artwork (Topic 2).
 Topic 2 must be done on a continuous basis during contact time, for example during four
 consecutive days of six hours each. The choice of examination time division or options
 must be negotiated within each school.
 Topic 2 must be done at the learner's examination centre or registered art and centre,
 under the supervision of the school teacher. Topic 2 work must NOT be done at home
 and must NOT leave the examination venue.
 A province will determine the process involved in the marking of Topic 1
 (sourcebook/process) and Topic 2 (final product). Schools will be notified by the
 provinces concerning date, time and venue for the submission of works to the
 examination centres, where applicable.
 Learners’ work is not restricted regarding size, but it should be a substantial body of work
 representing at least 12 hours and no more than 24 hours. Please adhere to the mark
 allocation when marking.
 The final art practical examination for Grade 10 and 11 represents the culmination of their
 art studies throughout the year.

ASSESSMENT GUIDELINES
TOPIC 1: Process-book/Sourcebook
 This must be completed at school and at home during term 3.
 The teacher must introduce the question paper
 The teacher can guide the learners in their choice of subject matter, media and
 techniques used in Topic 2 regarding the specific context of the school.
 The teacher must encourage the learners to explore as many different interpretations as
 possible. Closely monitor and guide the learners as they research the theme.
 The source book provides insight into the way that the learners have formed ideas, how
 many alternatives they have investigated and other processes leading to the final work.
 The Process-book/Sourcebook should clearly communicate all thought processes leading
 to the making of artworks.
 There are no restrictions on size and it can be presented in any form.
 It is important to ban direct copying from magazines, the Internet et cetera. Direct copying
 of an image that is not the learner’s own will be penalised. This is a form of plagiarism
 and is unacceptable.
 Utmost importance is placed on the process of transformation of the source material.
 Learners can, however, use appropriate images from magazines and other sources and
 combine them with other images to create their own interpretations.
 There should be a clear link between the final artwork and the visual/written information in
 the Process-book/Sourcebook.
 Emphasis should be placed on preparatory sketches, drawings, experimentation of
 technique and materials that will be used in the final work.
 In the Process-book/Sourcebook the learner should VISUALLY tell the ‘story’ of how the
 artwork was CONCEIVED, DEVELOPED AND PRODUCED. This should be done
 through drawing, writing, experimenting, pasting, photos, et cetera.
 The Process-book/Sourcebook should reflect individuality and creativity.

The following is a guideline of things that should be included in the Process-
book/Sourcebook:

 13
  Paste the examination paper/brief in front of the examination sourcebook
 Paste the examination paper/brief in front of the examination sourcebook
 Proposal/rationale, which could include mind maps, brainstorming, etc.
 Investigation, experimentation and research of approaches and/or ideas, which could
 include source material such as sketches. Drawings, photos, images, collected poems,
 lyrics and research on artists that have inspired. All material must relate to the
 development of the final artwork and substantiate decisions
 Personalise and create original preparatory/compositional sketches and drawings based
 on sources
 Process drawings / Storyboard
 If the work is more process-orientated, learners must include evidence of the creative
 process by documentation through original photographs, experiments and/or drawings /
 storyboard and accompanying texts.
TOPIC 2: Artwork
The over-arching importance of the assessment will be the art elements and principles of
design such as line, shape, colour, texture, space, rhythm, balance, proportion and
composition.
 The examination work must be done in the presence of the Design teacher within the
 confines of the Art room.
 All materials needed for the examination must be brought into the examination venue, but
 NO examination work may be taken out of the classroom. This is regarded as an
 examination irregularity
 Learners may discuss the question paper with their Visual Arts teacher prior to the start of
 the examination, but no discussion of work may occur during the examination period.
 The learners are required to produce ONE artwork in the practical discipline that they
 have chosen for the year,
 Their final artwork may be presented as a single piece, or possibly in the form of a
 diptych, triptych or a series of works that read as one work.
 Learners are not restricted on size, but the artwork must be manageable and durable in
 terms of transport to the examination centre, if required by the province.
 Allow for a variety of media, techniques, disciplines and approaches
 Learners should demonstrate an advanced degree of technical skill in the use of a range
 of materials and techniques chosen.
 There are no specific prescriptions regarding the style of the work. A learner may either
 work in the form of naturalism, expressionism, decorative, et cetera.
 Learners may also incorporate other media to create mixed media work in any of the
 practical disciplines.
 Artworks that leave the school and/or art room/school i.e. foundry work, firing of
 sculptures, digital printing of photographs, et cetera, must be closely monitored by the art
 educator signing the artwork in and out of the art room.
 Creativity and individuality must be emphasised. The artwork should be an expression of
 interests/ideas and concerns at the level of a Grade 10 and 11 candidate.
 A successful artwork shall be a combination of concept and realisation. Beware of
 illustrative work. Emphasis should be placed on the aesthetic qualities, ‘freshness’ and
 energy of the artwork.
 In all digital/multimedia/new media work, concept development and realisation must play
 an important role. When marking, evidence of the candidate’s thought processes leading
 to the final realisation of the concept should be visually evident.

 14
 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
The following criteria can be used as a marking guide for both subjects of Design and Visual
Arts.
TOPIC 1: PROCESS-BOOK/SOURCEBOOK
 ASSESSMENT Suggested mark
 This includes the following:
 CRITERIA allocation
 Concept  Mind maps, annotated sketches and drawings to
 show concept development. 10
 development
  This should include some or all of the
 following:
  Sketches, drawings, photos, images,
 collected poems, lyrics and any other
 Research,
 material that inspires you.
 investigation,
  Research on artists that have inspired you. 15
 experimentation,
  Experimentation of media and/or different
 et cetera
 techniques
  All material must relate to the development
 of your work,
  Substantiating your decisions.
 Process  At least 30% should be drawings to explain
 your concept development. 15
 drawings
  Visually interesting showing a personalized
 Presentation and approach.
 10
 overall view  Your sourcebook should consist of an
 average of 8-10 pages.
 Total 50

 TOPIC 2: THE ARTWORK/PRACTICAL
 ASSESSMENT Suggested
 This includes the following:
 CRITERIA mark allocation
 Choice and use of  Suitability of material and technique
 materials/ according to the concept. 10
 techniques  Safe and manageable. Technical skill
  The importance of the elements and
 Use of formal art principles of art such as line, shape, colour,
 10
 elements texture, space, rhythm, balance, harmony,
 proportion and composition.
 Overall
 impression of
  Generation of new, unique and novel
 work-originality, 10
 responses/solutions.
 creativity,
 innovation.
 Interpretation and
  A personal interpretation of a theme
 practical
  Experimenting. 10
 implementation of
 research.  Trying new challenges.
 Completion and  Attention to detail.
 presentation of  Task completed in allocated time. 10
 artwork.  Presentation according to task.
 Total 50

 15
 ASSESSMENT CRITERIA FOR PRACTICAL WORK

  The learner generated many ideas; tried unusual
 Combinations or changes before choosing one idea;
 made connections to previous knowledge; mastery of
 problem-solving skills.
  Effort far beyond that required.
  The 'WOW' factor is evident.
  Works show great innovation.
  Content/conceptual richness of the work is excellent.
  The work as a whole is confident and evocative: it
Outstanding 90 – 100 engages the viewer with excellent visual qualities.
  The work clearly demonstrates original vision, a variety
 of innovative ideas and/or risk taking, and inventive
 articulation of a broad range of the elements and
 principles.
  Outstanding and original presentation. Exceptional
 ability, creativity richness, insightful, fluent, high skill,
 observation and knowledge powerfully expressed;
 supported by an original or unusual selection of relevant
 visual references.
  Striking impact: most of the above; detailed: well
 organised and coherent; polished; skill evident;
 supported by an original /unusual/relevant visual
 Excellent 80 – 89 references; presentation original and considered; less
 resolved; some minor flaws evident.
  Often excellent technical abilities, but not as innovative
 OR very innovative, but lacking technical richness.
  Well organised, as above, but lacks the 'glow and
 sparkle’ (less convincing in terms of imagination,
 creativity and innovation); good level of competence and
 selection of content; supported by a good selection of
 relevant visual references; obvious care and effort taken
 with original presentation; some obvious
 Very Good 70 – 79 inconsistencies/flaws evident.
  Good evidence of effort and commitment.
 Interesting/innovative/creative, but not technically
 resolved.
  Technically good, but lacks conceptual richness or vice
 versa. Work may be creatively innovated, but lacks
 technical skill.
  The work demonstrates some originality; clear intent;
 convincing; simple direct use of medium; displays
 understanding but tends towards the pedestrian and
 Good 60 – 69 stereotyped response at times; adequate selection of
 relevant visual references; reasonable effort taken with
 presentation; distracting/obvious inconsistencies.
  Sound level of competence.
  Adequate; feels mechanical; derivative or copied; little
 insight.
 Average 50 – 59
  Unimaginative; some visual references not always
 clearly identified.

 16
  Fair presentation; many distracting inconsistencies.
  Average level of technical competence. Possibly limited
 commitment in terms of time and effort.
  Imagery is copied from another source with little
 transformation of images.
  Little evidence of trying anything unusual.
  Scope of work is narrow and or repetitive.
  Enough material/works to pass; not logically constructed.
  Limited selection of information; poor technical skills
 and/or a lack of time on task might be contributing
 factors.
 Below  Little use of visual information, clumsy or careless
 40 – 49
 Average presentation in need of support/motivation to pass.
  Imagery is copied from another source with very little
 transformation.
  Composition is weak and undeveloped; no evidence of
 planning, or incomplete planning.
  Just enough material/works to pass.
  Visually uninteresting, uncreative; limited/poor technical
 skill used.
  Little attempt to present information in an acceptable
 manner, little or no visual information/reference.
 Weak 30 – 39
  General lack of commitment; in need of
 support/motivation to pass.
  Insufficient time on task. Standard below the acceptable.
  Poor solutions to problems; artwork is copied and
 superficial. No evidence of original thought.
  Very little information; jumbled; not easy to view; little or
 irrelevant work/ visual information.
  No effort made to present work in an acceptable manner;
 general lack of commitment/cooperation.
 Very Weak
 20 – 29  Very poor skills level.
 Fail
  Project very weak or incomplete.
  Poor artistic decision-making.
  Classes were missed and learner failed to make up the
 time.
  Incoherent; irrelevant; very little or no work; lack of even
 limited skills; no commitment/ cooperation.
Unacceptable  Work incomplete.
 00 – 19
 Fail  Poor artistic decision-making/learner put forth no effort.
  Most classes were missed and student failed to make up
 the time.
Unacceptable  Incoherent: irrelevant, very little or no work: lack of even
 00 – 19
 Fail limited skills being applied. No commitment/cooperation.

 17
 THE RETROSPECTIVE (RETROGRADE) EXHIBITION
 (DBE MARK SHEET: DESIGN PAT)
Learners must present a small, Retrospective (Retrograde) Exhibition of their work as a
part of their Examination Mark. The total of this exhibition is 100 marks. It is similar to a
small one-person exhibition or a student graduate exhibition.

This exhibition provides substantial evidence and showcases the learner’s Practical
Work (Exam) developed over a period of time. According to CAPS, Grade 10 and 11
leaners must Display, Exhibit or Present own work in a manner which enhances and
complements the expressive and conceptual impact of the work.

Checklist of the Exhibition
 Grade 11: PAT 1 and PAT 2, Trial Examination Practical is compulsory. This
 includes Artworks and Process-books/Sourcebooks.
 One or Two Grade 10 Artworks to show Development and Progression.
 Learners have the opportunity to further develop and extend their PATs into a
 cohesive and holistic body of work that is seen in the context of an exhibition
 environment. Therefore, learners may exhibit more works that provide evidence of
 this process.

Presentation
 Teachers should provide the space for the exhibition, e.g. the school hall, art
 classroom, etc.
 Teachers should make learners aware of the importance of presenting their work
 and provide guidelines for a neat, professional exhibition.
 The learner’s name should be clearly displayed and the Grade 10 or 11 PATs clearly
 labelled.
 Framing of artworks is unnecessary, but in many cases simple mounting will
 enhance the artwork
 Learners to refrain from using props, accessories, etc. The Exhibition must show an
 awareness of professional Exhibition practices.
 Should it be necessary to use computers to show digital work, teachers must make
 sure that they (computers) work with correct and/or known passwords

 18
 Assessment
The body of work will be assessed holistically (as a whole body of work).
 The following is a guideline of aspects that will result in the final valid mark:
  Overall progress and development of the learner to independent and individual
 solutions
  Creativity and originality
  Technical skills
  Personal involvement and expression in the Process and Product (final artwork)
  Substantiation in the Process-book/Sourcebook: conceptualisation, exploration
 and experimentation of media, techniques, styles, etc. Sufficient exploration of
 drawing
  Full marks cannot be awarded if all required artworks are not presented. Marks
 should be adjusted according to the presented works.

 THE ASSESSMENT CRITERIA FOR PRACTICAL WORK SHOULD BE USED AS A
 MARKING GUIDE
Assessment Process
 The Retrospective Exhibition MUST be face-moderated
 The teacher MUST mark the Retrospective Exhibition using the assessment criteria
 Provinces will follow a Standardised National format of examining:
  The Provincial Panel (which may comprise of National Examiners) will be
 appointed by Province and despatched to any District to assess learners on a
 ‘sample basis’
  Provinces with smaller numbers may appoint a Marking Panel consisting of
 Examiners appointed by the Provincial Education Department to mark the
 Districts. They MUST be Subject Advisor/s and experienced/lead teachers
  Cluster-marking or panels of Subject Advisors and teachers may be appointed by
 the Provincial Education Department
 Face-Moderation is essential for Standardisation
 The Moderator MUST be a Provincial Subject Coordinator or any other Subject
 Advisor appointed by the province (for moderation) for verification of the final mark.
 The DBE Arts Subject Specialist will monitor the Provincial Retrospective Exhibition.

 19
 General guidelines to teachers, examiners, and moderators
 Use the assessment criteria for practical work
 Sensitivity to the context of the school, e.g. resources, facilities, etc.
 Realistic marking, and not according to personal preferences
 Reward rather than being punitive to the learner. The best work should guide the
 assessment
 Provinces cannot make their own requirements regarding to style, technique, etc.
 Examiners and Moderators MUST never impose their traditional ideas of school art
 in the marking. Knowledge of contemporary art practise is essential
 Marking MUST be CAPS compliant
AN EXAMPLE OF A DESIGN or VISUAL ARTS RETROSPECTIVE EXHIBITION
MARK SHEET
 PROVINCE :
 DISTRICT :
 SCHOOL :
 DATE :
 Centre No :
 CANDIDATES NAMES IN
 ALPHABETICAL ORDER TEACHER EXAM PANEL MODERATOR
 Name Surname

 CHIEF MARKER’S SIGNATURE
 DATE:

 MODERATOR’S SIGNATURE:
 DATE:

 SCHOOL STAMP:

 PRINCIPAL’S SIGNATURE
 DATE:

 ADVANTAGES OF RETROSPECTIVE (RETROGRADE) EXHIBITION
  There will be standardisation
  Marking the skill of putting up an exhibition
  It becomes on-site and face moderated
  Exhibition to school community
  Curating, labelling and mounting (mounted and exhibited work may improve
 results)
  Holistic development of candidate which includes, but not limited to, business
 processes, networking, etc.
  Process-book/Sourcebook serves as a ‘report and/or calling card’ for the
 candidate in future arts industry engagements

 20
 Page 47 of the Business Studies CAPS must read as follows:
4.4 FORMS OF ASSESSMENT
4.4.1 ASSIGNMENT - TERM 1.

Assignments can take on the following forms:
  Case Study
  Report
  Data Response
  Media research
  Essay Narrative research/Scientific
 Note: Two types of referencing:
  Text referencing: where verbatim quotes are taken directly from
 reference/s as well as,
  Out of text referencing / bibliography: where reference/s used for
 research and information must be acknowledged at the end of the task

The following outline the requirements of an assignment (for all types of
assignments listed above):

  It takes place within a shorter period of time, must be completed within a week
  This task must be completed by individual learners. (Group work is not
 allowed as it influences mark allocations as well and result in SBA marks
 being skewed )
  Terms of reference: A topic must be specified and clear instructions must be
 given to learners as guidance.
  All tasks must be administered under controlled conditions. Learners must
 collect information and bring it to the classroom where the teacher and
 learners can interact with collected information to complete the task.
  Synthesis must be built into the task where learners must after research be
 able to make recommendations, give opinions, suggestions or justifications on
 the topic.

 21
  Learners must acknowledge all references used throughout the task as well as
 in a Bibliography /References. Refer to the note under Essay Narrative
 research above.
  If a rubric is used as a marking tool the following aspects are of importance:
  Clear level descriptors must be used representing the contents of the topic
 identified for assessment through specific criteria. (not skipping any level
 e.g. Levels 0 ,1,2,3,4,5). It must be clear what a learner is expected to
 complete to receive maximum marks or any mark in between the levels.
  Technical criteria must also be clearly defined in the level descriptors.
  In addition to the rubric a suggested marking guideline/memo must be
 developed to justify the marks allocated in the rubric to accommodate
 maximum levels.
  This rubric must be given and explained to learners together with the
 instructions of the task.

4.4.2 Presentation: Term 2
  A presentation in Business Studies consists of the following components:
  Written (30) marks
  Oral (20) marks
  Total mark: (50) marks

  This task must be completed by individual learners. (Group work is not
 allowed as it influences mark allocations as well and result into skewed SBA
 marks).
  Terms of reference: A topic must be specified and clear instructions must be
 given to learners as guidance.
  Synthesis must be built into the task where learners must after research be
 able to make recommendations, give opinions, suggestions or justifications on
 the topic.
  Learners must acknowledge all references used throughout the task as well
 as in a Bibliography /References.
  Separate rubrics must be used as marking tools and the following aspects are
 of importance:

 22
  All criteria used to assess must be discussed with the learners prior to
 the commencement of the presentation.
  Clear level descriptors must be used representing the contents of the
 topic identified for assessment through specific criteria (not skipping any
 level e.g. Levels 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5). It must be clear what a learner is
 expected to complete to receive maximum marks or any mark in between
 the levels.
  Technical aspects required must also be set as criteria and to be clearly
 defined in the level descriptors.
  Learner must be assessed on how they respond to questions and answer
 in a professional manner for which a descriptor must be clearly set.

  Where resources are available, the use of electronic presentations might be
 encouraged and where resources are not available, posters and handout
 presentations should be encouraged.

4.4.3 Projects: Term 3
  Generally, projects are given a longer period of time, that is, one to two
 months to complete as they involve some form in research, consolidating and
 choosing relevant information and preparing a written document as evidence.

  Learners should be given the necessary guidance prior to commencement of
 the project and progress must be monitored throughout the project. All criteria
 used to assess the project must be discussed with them before commencing
 with the project.

  Projects generally work well is they are structured around some form of
 problem and learners guided towards further research.

  The purpose of a research project is to develop the research, critical thinking
 and problem-solving skills of learners.

 23
  It is recommended that teachers allow learners to collect information for the
 projects and bring it to class and allocate class time e.g. 10 min every week
 for learners to work individually on their projects under controlled conditions. In
 this way teachers can ensure that the work is original and the work of the
 individual learner.
  Research instruments used must be added as an annexure/addendum serving
 as evidence of research conducted e.g. questionnaires and responses.
  The project must NOT be treated as a presentation. Learners do not have to
 do presentations of/on their findings of the research.
  Important: refer to the note at the end of the Term 2 content (page 17 for
 Grade10, page 27 for Grade 11 and page 40 for Grade12) in this CAPS
 document namely that the project topic and instructions and marking rubric,
 must be given in term 2 for submission in Term 3.
  Separate rubrics must be used as marking tools and the following aspects are
 of importance:
  All criteria used to assess must be discussed with the learners prior to
 the commencement of the project.
  Clear level descriptors must be used representing the contents of the
 topic identified for assessment through specific criteria (not skipping any
 level e.g. Levels 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5). It must be clear what a learner is
 expected to complete to receive maximum marks or any mark in between
 the levels.
  A marking rubric of the instructions and the topics that represents the
 maximum allocation according to the rubric must be drawn up by the
 teacher to be submitted as an indication of the assessment of the project.
  Technical aspects required must also be set as criteria and to be clearly
 defined in the level descriptors

4.4.4 Controlled test 1 and 2

4.4.5 Examination

 24
 Grade 10 – 11: No clarity on minimum mark allocation for SBA tests

All SBA (PoA) Tests: Min 45 marks

Grade 10-11: Change of description in CAPS

Change table to:

 Lower order Middle order Higher order

Knowledge Understand & Apply Analyse, Evaluate & Create

 30% 40% 30%

 25
 4.3.1 The number of assessment tasks per subject (page 61)
  Reduce the number of formal assessment from 10 per year to 7. Remove
 the Project as a formal assessment task from the SBA. The content that
 was included for assessment in the project must be included for
 assessment in daily activities in preparation for formal assessment.
Only two SBA tasks per term to be included in Grades 10-11 as indicated in the
table below.

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4
 Test June Examination Test PAT
 = 75% = 75% = 75% = 25%
 Practical Practical Lessons SBA = 25%
 Practical Lessons
 Lessons = Final Examination
 = 25%
 = 25% 25% 50%

4.3.1 Table 1a (page 61)

Weighting of the assessment tasks in terms of time and mark allocation

 Current Amendment

Test 50% Change the weighting of the Test: 75%

Project = 25 % Remove the Project as part of formal assessment.
Practical Lessons = 25% Retain the Practical Lessons and weighting

Table 1 a FORMAL ASSESSMENT: GRADE 10 & 11 (page 61)
 TERM 4:
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3
 Promotion mark
 Task 3
Task 1 Task 5
 75% Midyear 75% 75%
Test Test
 examination
 Term 1+2+3=300٪3 = 100
Tasks 2 Tasks 4 Tasks 6 PAT 1 + 2 = 50+50 = 100
Four(4) Four(4) Four(4) November
Practical 25% Practical 25% Practical 25% Examination paper = 200
lessons lessons lessons
(2.1/ 2.2/ 2.3/ (4.1/ 4.2/ 4.3/ (6.1/ 6.2/ 6.3/
2.4) 4.4) 6.4)
TOTAL 100 100 100 400 ٪ 4 = 100

 26
 4.3.2 Cognitive levels and levels of difficulty for cognitive demand (page62)

Levels of difficulty for formal assessment tasks
  Easy = 30%
  Moderate =50%
  Difficult =20%
Suggested weighting for cognitive levels
  Lower order 30% (Remembering)
  Middle order 50% (Understanding 20% Applying 30%)
  Higher order 20% (Evaluating, Analysing and Creating)

5 Editorial corrections
Project term 1 (page 19 and 26)
 Project term 1 (page 19 and 26)
Delete the section on projects to
 Delete the section on projects to align with the
align with Table 1 a (on page 61)
 amended Table 1 a (on page 61)
to reduce workload
Omission in Practical lesson 11 Practical lesson 11 pg. 40: Add bottled fruit
 Label and Number the tasks 1,2,3 for first term 4,5,6
 for term 2 and 7 and 8 for term 3 to align with SA
Omission of task numbers on p 61
 SAMS

 Use consistent terminology throughout the CAPS for
pg 38/43/47/51/55/61/63
 practical work.
Inconsistent use of terminology
 Replace task with lessons
e.g. The use of practical task in-
 (page 38/43/47/51/55/61/ 63)
stead of practical lesson
 4.4 Practical lessons
 Grade 12
 Correct the number of practical lessons per term
pg 63: Incorrect number of
 Must read: ……….do a minimum of six (6) practical
practical lessons for Grade 12
 lessons during the year, three in each of the first two
 terms.

 Include the following to complete and align the
 headings for Services subjects.
 4.1 Introduction to Assessment (page 60)
 Assessment is a continuous, planned process of
Section 4
 identifying, gathering and interpreting information
Headings and content in Section
 about the performance of learners, using various forms
4.
 of assessment. It involves four steps: generating and
Ref: (page 60)
 collecting evidence of achievement; evaluating this
Some headings and information
 evidence; recording the findings and using this
omitted from Consumer Studies.
 information to understand and thereby assist the
 learner’s development in order to improve the process
 of learning and teaching.

 27
 Assessment involves activities that are undertaken
 throughout the year. In Grades 10-11 assessment
 comprises of two different but related activities:
 informal assessment (assessment for learning) and
 formal assessment (assessment of learning).

 4.3.1 (page 61)
 The formal assessment requirements for
 Consumer Studies are as follows:
  Three formal theoretical assessment tasks in
 Grade 10 and 11 must be completed during the
 school year.
4.3.1 (page 61)  The twelve practical lessons make up 25% of
Table and narrative not aligned the total SBA mark for Consumer Studies in
 Grades 10-11.
  The end of the year assessment includes two
 parts: a practical assessment task (includes two
 practical examinations) and a written theory
 paper. Together these two parts make up the
 remaining 75% in all grades.
4.3.2 Projects (page 62)
Delete the section on projects to 4.3.2 Projects (page 62)
align with Table 1 a to reduce Delete the section on projects to align with Table 1 a.
workload
 4.4 Practical work (page 63)
4.4 (page 63)
 4.4.1 Practical lessons
Correct the headings and sub-
 4.4.2 Practical Assessment Task (PAT)
headings for Practical work
 4.4.1 Practical lessons (page 63)
 Bullet 3
4.4 1 (page 63)
 Examples of suggested dishes for the practical lessons
Remove ambiguity
 are reflected in the term plans.

 4.4.2 Practical Assessment Task
 Task 1 and 2 (page 63)
4.4.2
 Bullet 2:
Practical Assessment Task
 - In Grade 12 these examinations take place in term
Task 1 and 2
 1 to 3.
Amend pg. 63 to reflect that the
 - Include the sentence: In consultation with the
PAT can take place as follows:
 Subject Advisor a school may start Grade 12 PAT
- Grade 12: Term 1, 2 and 3
 1 in term 1.
- Grades 10 and 11: Terms
 - In Grade 10 and 11….. examinations may be done
 2,3,and 4
 in term 2, 3 and 4

 28
 The duration of Practical 4.4.2 Practical Assessment Task
Examinations are not specified. Task 1 and 2 (page 63)
 Duration for practical examinations in each option per
 grade.
 FOOD PRODUCTION
 Grade 11 2 hours
 Grade 10 1½ hours

 CLOTHING PRODUCTION
 1 hour (Layout and cutting)
 Grade 11
 2½ hours
 1 hour (Layout and cutting)
 Grade 10
 2 hours

 KNITTING AND CROCHETING PRODUCTION

 Two sessions of 3 hours each
 Grade 11
 (30-minute break after two hours)

 Grade 10 Two sessions of 2½ hours each

 SOFT FURNISHING PRODUCTION
 1 hour (Layout and cutting)
 Grade 11
 2½ hours
 1 hour (Layout and cutting)
 Grade 10
 2 hours

 PATCHWORK AND QUILTING BY HAND
 PRODUCTION
 1 hour (Layout and cutting)
 Grade 11 3 hours
 (30-minute break after two hours)
 1 hour (Layout and cutting)
 Grade 10 3 hours
 (30-minute break after two hours)

Layout for the June Examination
paper is not included for Grades Layout included below for Grades 10-12
10-12
Examinations (page 63) Examinations (page 63)
Bullet 3 above the table Bullet 3
Improve the wording to align with The mark allocation in the table below reflects marks for:
the text in the table.  Grade 10 and 11: November examinations
4.6.2 Practical Assessment
Task (PAT)
 Bullet 4 (page 65)
Bullet 4 (page 65)
 Change the word block ‘assessment’ to block ‘adjustment’
Correct the incorrect word for
clarity.

 29
 4.3.2 Types of formal assessment tasks for Consumer Studies
Tests (page 62)
GUIDELINES FOR SETTING A TEST AND A MARKING GUIDELINE
(Applicable to grades 10 and 11)
  Minimum total: 50
  Time: 1 min per question – 50 minutes actual writing time
  The cover page to include the name of the school, the date, name of the subject,
 time allocation, mark total, name of examiner and moderator
  All papers must be typed – graphics/illustrations clear
  No spelling, language or translation errors are allowed
  Include TWO sections (Section A and B)

SECTION A: Short questions (15 marks)
Multiple choice questions (5x1 marks)
Include a variety of short questions (Examples: Pairing off items; Choose the correct word,
Select the answer from a list; crossword puzzles) (10 x 1 marks)
Note: NO true/false questions are allowed.

SECTION B: (35 marks)
Include:
  Questions that require a longer response for the answer.
  A question that requires a response in paragraph format ( minimum 5 marks)
  Source-based questions (case studies, scenarios, extracts, pictures, cartoons,
 advertisements, flow-charts, table or graphs)
  An action verb to open the question. This gives a clear instruction for the answer.

MARKING GUIDELINE
  Must contain name of school, date, subject, marks, name of the examiner and
 moderator on the first page.
  All Marking guidelines must be typed – have no spelling errors and must reflect
 correct numbering to align with the question paper.
  Indicate the mark allocation for each fact with a tick
  Include all alternative responses.

 30
 4.3.2 Types of formal assessment tasks for Consumer Studies
 Examinations (page 63)

LAYOUT OF EXAMINATION PAPERS - MIDYEAR (JUNE EXAMINATION)

Grade 10
Total: 100 marks - Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes
 Content 100
Question 1 Short questions ( all topics covered in term 1 and 2) 20
Question 2 The Consumer 40
Question 3 Food and Nutrition 40

Grade 11
Total: 150 marks - Duration: 2 hours
 Content 150
Section A Short questions (all topics covered in term 1 and 2) 30
Section B The Consumer 20
Section C Food and Nutrition 50
 Design Elements and Principles 30
Section D
 Fibres and Fabrics 20

 31
 pg : 40 – 41: 4.4. Mark allocation for the development of the SBA mark sheet
Grade 10 : Mid-year: column has been divided into:
Paper 1 = 100 and Paper 2 =100
Grade 11 and 12: Mid-year column has been divided into:
Paper 1 = 150 and Paper 2 =150
Grades 10-12: Final examinations column has been divided into
Paper 1 = 150 and Paper 2 =150

Refer to Programme of Assessment
pg. 43-44
4.4.2 Examinations
Grade 10 – 100 marks – 1h30mins
Grade 11 – 150 marks – 2 hours
Grade 12 – 150 marks – 2 hours

pg. 45
The first sentence is amended and should read as follows:
4.7 The Economics examination papers consists of TWO (2) 2 hours papers of 150 marks
each.
Question 2.2 mark allocation should be 2x10=20 (it should be two questions each weighing
10 marks)

pg. 45-46
1.3 should now read: Identify the concept
2.1.1 Name/List any TWO 2 X 1 = (2)
2.1.2 Why/How/Explain 1X2= (2)
2.2 Data response: Study the following graph/ cartoon, table/ text etc and answer the
questions that follow (10)
2.3 Data response: Study the following graph/ cartoon, table/ text etc and answer the
questions that follow. (10)
2.4 Compare, Contrast, Draw, Solve, Distinguish; Differentiate, Explain, etc (Middle order)
2.5 Compare, Contrast, Draw, Solve, Distinguish; Differentiate, Explain, etc (Higher order)
(8)

 32
 Mark allocation
Introduction – 2 marks
Body – Main part – 26 marks
Additional part – 10 marks
Conclusion – 2 marks

pg. 40-41 Annexure
 ECONOMICS PROGRAMME OF ASSESSMENT
 GRADE 10
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 Controlled Test

 Mid-year Exam

 Controlled Test

 EXAMINATION
 Assignment

 Case Study

 Year mark
 Project

 TOTAL
 FINAL
Assessment

 100 100 150 150
 Total Marks 50 100 50 50 100 550
 (P1) (P2) (P1) (P2)

 550
Converted to /5.5
 300 400
a mark out of: =
 100

 GRADE 11
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4
 Controlled Test

 Mid-year Exam

 Controlled Test

 EXAMINATION
 Assignment

 Case Study

 Year mark
 Project

 TOTAL

 Assessment
 FINAL

 150 150 150 150
 Total Marks 50 100 50 50 100 650
 (P1) (P2) (P1) (P2)
 650
 Converted to
 /6.5
 a mark out 300 400
 =
 of:
 100

 33
 4.3.1 Summary of formal assessments expected in Grades 10 to 11
 RECOMMENDATIONS

 The weighting of tasks for term reporting should be included as follows:

 Grade

 Grade
 10

 11
 Weigh

 Weigh
 Marks

 Marks
 Term

 Task

 ting

 ting
 Data handling 75 67% 75 67%
 1
 Test 75 33% 75 33%
 Mapwork 75 50% 75 50%
 2
 Mid-year examination 200 50% 300 50%
 Research/Essay 100 67% 100 67%
 3 Test 75 33% 75 33%
 Trial Exam

4.3.2 Formal assessment requirements for Geography (pg 51)
Table 1 on suggested cognitive levels does not have examples of action verbs associated
with each level.

Table 2
 L1
 L2 L3
 (Knowledge/
 (Understanding/ Applying) (Analysing, Evaluating, Creating)
 Remembering)
 Apply; Change ; Choose Compute Apply ; Appraise ; Argue ; Assess
 ; Conclude; Demonstrate; Change ; Choose Compute Compos,
Define; Describe; Draw Discuss; Explain; Generalise; Construct ; Create ; Critic ; Conclude
Find; Identify ; Label Identify; Illustrate Interpret Decide ; Design ;Develop; Evaluate;
List; Match; Name Interview Paraphrase Predict ; Integrate ; Invent; Interview Prepare
Quote; Recall; Sequence Report; Restate; Review Produce ; Select ; Show; Transfer ; Use
Tell ; Write; Count Summarize ; Tell; Prepare ;Make; Organize Perform ; Plan ; Produce
 Produce; Select ; Show Propose ; Rewrite ; Judge ; Justify ; Predict
 Transfer ; Use ; Prioritise ; Prove ; Rank; Rate; Select

4.4.2 Examples of possible assessment activities

  Essay should only be done in Grade 10 (p54).
  Research should be done in Grades 11 and 12 (p54).

 34
 4.4.1. Programme of Assessment and Weighting of tasks (pg. 34 - 37)

Grades 10 and 11

 In addition to the weighting of tasks at the end of the year, the weighting of tasks for
 term reporting should be included as follows:

 Grade

 Grade
 10

 11
 Weighting

 Weighting
 Term

 Task

 Marks

 Marks
 Source-based 50 67% 50 67%
 1
 Test 75 33% 100 33%
 Heritage/Oral History/Research 50 50% 50 50%
 2
 Mid-year examination 100 50% 150 50%
 Source-based
 Source-based 50 33% 50 33%
 3 Test 100 67% 100 67%
 Trial Exam

P.34 .It is recommended that Source-based Questions and Essay Task to be set out of
50 marks each equal to 100 reduced to 20.

4.4.2 Examinations (pg. 37)

Grade 10
Mid-year Examination: The question paper should be reduced to 2 hours.

 35
 The number of assessment tasks per subject
  Reduce the number of formal assessment from 10 per year to 7 to align with
 policy. Remove the Project as a formal assessment task from the SBA.
  Only two SBA tasks per term are included per term as indicated in the table
 below.

 Term 1 Term 2 Term 3 Term 4
 June Examination
 Test = 75% Test = 75% PAT = 25%
 = 75%
 Practical Lessons Practical Lessons Practical Lessons = SBA = 25%
 = 25% = 25% 25% Final Examination 50%

Weighting of the Assessment Tasks in terms of Time and Mark Allocation

 Current Amendment

 Test 50% Change the weighting of the Test: 75%

 Project = 25 % Remove the Project as part of formal assessment.
 Practical Lessons
 Retain the Practical Lessons and weighting of 25%
 = 25%

Table 1 a FORMAL ASSESSMENT: GRADE 10 & 11 (page 40)
 TERM 4
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3
 Promotion mark
 Task 3
 Task 1 Task 5
 75% Midyear 75% 75%
 Test Test
 examination
 Task 2
 Three(3) Term 1+2+3=300٪3 = 100
 Practical Task 4 Task 6
 PAT 1 + 2 = 50+50 = 100
 lessons Four(4) Four(4)
 (2.1/ 2.2/ Practical Practical
 November
 25% 25% 25% Examination paper = 200
 2.3/ lessons lessons
 PLUS (4.1/ 4.2/ (6.1/ 6.2/ 6.3/
 A Practical 4.3/ 4.4) 6.4)
 Skills test
 (2.4)

 TOTAL 100 100 100 400 ٪ 4 = 100

 Page 36 of 53
 4.4.2 Cognitive levels and levels of difficulty for cognitive demand (page41)

Levels of difficulty for formal assessment tasks
  Easy = 30%
  Moderate =50%
  Difficult =20%
Suggested weighting for cognitive levels
  Lower order 30% (Remembering)
  Middle order 50% (Understanding 20% Applying 30%)
  Higher order 20% (Evaluating, Analysing and Creating)

Editorial corrections /omissions
 Project term 1 (page 20 and 27) Project term 1 (page 20 and 27)
 Delete the section on projects Delete the section on projects to align with the amended
 to align with Table 1 a (on page Table 1 a (on page 61)
 61) to reduce workload
 4.1 Introduction to 4.1 Introduction to Assessment (page 39)
 Assessment (page 39) In Grades 10-12 assessment comprises of two different
 Last paragraph: but related activities
 Correct the sentence for clarity
 4.3 Formal Assessment (page 4.3 Formal Assessment (page 39)
 39) Include this sentence to complete the second paragraph:
 No indication that all content All content topics must be included for formal
 must be assessed assessment at least once during the year.
 4.3.1 (page 39) 4.3.1 (page 39)
 Add the above numbering The formal assessment requirements for Hospitality
 Table and narrative not aligned Studies are as follows:
  Three formal theoretical assessment tasks in
 Grade 10 and 11 must be completed during the
 school year.
  Twelve practical lessons in Grade 10 and 11
 make up 25% of the total SBA mark for
 Hospitality Studies.
  The end of the year assessment includes two
 parts: a practical assessment task (includes two
 practical examinations) and a written theory
 paper. Together these two parts make up the
 remaining 75% in all grades.
 Table 1a Term 1 Task 2.4 Table 1a Term 1 Task 2.4 (page 40)
 (page 40)
 Replace one practical lesson Introduce in Grades 10 and 11 a practical skills test:
 with a practical test to 25 marks
 strengthen development of
 skills in preparation of the PAT.
 4.4.1 Projects (page 41) 4.4.1 Projects (page 41)
 Delete the section on projects Delete the section on projects to align with Table 1 a on
 to align with Table 1 a to reduce page 40.
 workload

 Page 37 of 53
 4.4.4 Practical Tasks 4.4.4 Practical Lessons (page 42)
 (page 42) Use consistent terminology throughout the CAPS for
 Inconsistent use of terminology practical work.
 e.g. The use of practical task in- Replace practical task with practical lessons
 stead of practical lesson
 4.4.5 Practical Assessment 4.4.5 Practical Assessment Task (PAT) (page 42)
 Task (PAT) (page 42) Bullet 1 / 2 /6:
 Bullet 1: The Practical Assessment Task for each grade
 Editorial error comprises of two practical examinations.
 Correct as indicated. Replace the word function with examination
 Bullet 2: Bullet 2:
 Correct as indicated. Grade 10 examinations may be done in terms 3 and 4.
 Bullet 6: Bullet 6:
 Correct as indicated. Examinations can take place during or after school
 hours.
 Criteria for PAT in each grade Criteria for PAT in each grade
 (Table page 43) (Table page 43)
 Editorial error Grade 11
 Give two options for the PAT in Give two options:
 Grade 11 1. Light meal or tea (3 courses)
 2. Dinner: 4 courses (Starter and 3 courses)
 4.7.2 Practical Assessment 4.7.2 Practical Assessment Task ( page 45)
 Task ( page 45) Bullet 3
 Correct the incorrect word for Change the word block ‘assessment’ to block
 clarity. ‘adjustment’

4.4.2 Types of formal assessment tasks for Hospitality Studies
Tests (page 41)
GUIDELINES FOR SETTING A TEST AND A MARKING GUIDELINE
(Applicable to grades 10 and 11)
  Minimum total: 50
  Time: 1 min per question – 50 minutes actual writing time
  The cover page to include the name of the school, the date, name of the subject,
 time allocation, mark total, name of examiner and moderator
  All papers must be typed – graphics/illustrations clear
  No spelling, language or translation errors are allowed
  Include TWO sections (Section A and B)

SECTION A: Short questions (15 marks)
Multiple choice questions (5x1 marks)
Include a variety of short questions (Examples: Pairing off items; Choose the correct word,
Select the answer from a list; crossword puzzles) (10 x 1 marks)
Note: NO true/false questions are allowed.

 Page 38 of 53
 SECTION B: (35 marks)
Include:
  Questions that require a longer response for the answer.
  A question that requires a response in paragraph format ( minimum 5 marks)
  Source-based questions (case studies, scenarios, extracts, pictures, cartoons,
 advertisements, flow-charts, table or graphs)
  An action verb to open the question. This gives a clear instruction for the answer.

MARKING GUIDELINE
  Must contain name of school, date, subject, marks, name of the examiner and
 moderator on the first page.
  All Marking guidelines must be typed – have no spelling errors and must reflect
 correct numbering to align with the question paper.
  Indicate the mark allocation for each fact with a tick
  Include all alternative responses.

4.4.3 Types of formal assessment tasks for Hospitality Studies
Examinations (page 42) include the layout for the June exam in Grades 10-11
LAYOUT OF EXAMINATION PAPERS - MIDYEAR (JUNE)
Suggested mark allocation per section
Grade 10: Total: 100 marks – Duration 1 hour 30 minutes
 Content 100
 Section A Short questions (All topics covered in term 1 and 2) 20
 Section B Kitchen and restaurant operations, Hygiene 20
 Section C Nutrition and menu planning, Food commodities 40
 Section D Sectors and Careers; Food and Beverage service 20

Grade 11: Total: 150 marks - Duration: 2 hours
 Content 150
 Section A Short questions (All topics covered in term 1 and 2) 30
 80
 Section B Nutrition and menu planning, Food commodities
 (2 x 40)
 40
 Section C Sectors and Careers; Food and Beverage service
 (2x20)

 Page 39 of 53
 Grade 10-11: Minimum mark allocation for SBA tests

All SBA (PoA) Tests: Min 45 marks

Grade 10-11: Change of description in CAPS
Change table to:

 Lower order Middle order Higher order

 Knowledge Understand & Apply Analyse, Evaluate & Create

 30% 40% 30%

Grade 10-11: Addressing overload through changing tool
Change the implementation tool in Grade 10 from Scratch to be the same as in
Grade 11 & 12 (high level language - Delphi)

 Page 40 of 53
 Languages: Sections 3

Home Languages:
Decrease the length for ‘introducing a speaker’ and ‘vote of thanks’ to 2-3 minutes for
Grades 10-11.

Home Languages:
Prepared speeches: Increase the speaking time progressively:
  2-3 minutes for Grade 10, and
  3-4 minutes for Grade 11.

Section 4

Home Languages & First Additional Languages:

Examinations
Format of Examination Paper 3:
  Increase time allocation to 3 hours for Grades 10-11.

Second Additional Languages:
  Increase time allocation for Paper 1 to 3 hours for Grades 10-11.

Second Additional Languages: Increase time allocation for Paper 2 to 2½ hours
for Grades 10-11.

 Page 41 of 53
 Page 17 Weeks 4-6 replace the incorrect word “admission score point” to “admission points
 score”.
 Page 25 Informal or Daily Tasks add “It is suggested that a minimum of ONE informal task be
 given per week”.
 Page 30 Outline of Examinations in Section B the sentence “Learners should provide direct
 responses , full sentences in point form” should be replaced with “Learners are required to
 write in complete sentences”
 Page 39 (Afrikaans Life Orientation CAPS/ Lewensoriëntering KABV) replace the incorrect
 word with the correct word indicated in bold letters below:
 4.7.Vervang “religiewaardig”, met “geloofwaardig”
 “Moderering van formele assesseringstake in Lewensoriëntering” …Nasionale Senior
 Sertifikaat “geloofwaardig”, betroubaar en geldig is”.

4.4 Formal Assessment page 26
The table page 27 on suggested cognitive levels does not have adequate examples of action
verbs associated with each level. The following should be added:
 L1 and L 2 L3 and L 4 L5 and L 6
 Rememberin
 Understanding Applying Analysing Evaluating Creating
 g
 Exhibit memory Demonstrate Solve problems Examine and Present and Complied
 of previously understanding of to new break information defend opinions information
 learned material facts and ideas by situations by into parts by by making together in a
 by recalling organizing applying identifying motive judgements different way by
 facts, basic comparing acquired or causes. Make about information combining
 concepts; and translating, knowledge, inference and , validity of ideas elements in a
 answers. interpreting, giving facts techniques find evidence to or quality of work new pattern or
 descriptions and and rules in a support based on a set of proposing an
 stating main ideas. different way. generalisations criteria alternative
 solutions
 Choose Classify Apply Analyse Apply Change
 Define Compare Choose Assume Appraise Choose
 Find Contrast Develop Categorise Assess Combine
 How Explain Identify Classify Compare Compile
 List Illustrate Interview Compare Conclude Compose
 Match Outline Construct Contrast Criticise Construct
 Name Summarise Report Conclusion Decide Create
 Relate Infer Change Distinguish Defend Develop
 Select Relate Conclude Examine Determine Discuss
 What Show Demonstrate Infer Evaluate Elaborate
 When Demonstrate Discuss Explain List Explain Imagine
 Where Identify Interpret Improve
 Which Illustrate Judge Plan
 Who Interpret Justify Predict
 Why Report Opinion Propose
 Review Recommend Solve
 Summarise Support Suppose
 Tell Argue Produce
 Prepare
 Show

 Page 42 of 53
 Page 32: Assessment tool for PET

The assessment tool for learner performance has only one criterion. The frequency of
participation is not assessed. Only movement performance is assessed.

Criterion 1: Frequency of Participation (no marks allocated)
A record of learner participation will be kept in the teacher file for each type of movement
assessment.
Criterion 2: Movement Performance
While a record will be kept of learner participation per period, learners will not be assessed
on movement performance in every Physical Education period, but will be formally assessed
twice across a school term.
Allocate a mark out of 10 for each of the two formal assessments; add the two to obtain a
final mark out of 20.

 Assessment tool for learner performance in criterion two of the task

 Level Limited Adequate Proficient Excellent
 Criterion Needs significant Requires attention Efficient , effective Exceptional
 Outcome of attention: and refinement: and appropriate level of skills:
 Movement movements do lapses in movements movements mostly movement
 performance not produce the which do not always produce the correct always produce
 desired outcome produce the desired desired outcome the desired
 outcome outcome
 20 Marks 0-5 6-10 7-15 16-20

A recording sheet will be generated by using a √ for participation, “a” for absent or “x” for
present but did not participate for the criterion frequency of participation and a mark out of 20
will be allocated for movement performance at the end of each term, that is four class lists
for Grades 10 and 11.The number of PE periods will depend on the Department of Basic
Education school calendar for the year.
An example of the class list for participation and movement performance:
 1 Frequency of participation: No
 marks allocated 2 Movement performance Total for
 Term 1
 Number of PE periods completed Total 20 Marks term
 term (P1=1period)
 Assessment Assessment Total
 Learner’s 1 2
 P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 Marks
 Names
 10 10 20
1 T Mabunda √ √ √ a √ √
2
3

 Page 43 of 53
 Grade 10 & 11: Reduction in the Number of Assessment Tasks
  Reduce the number of SBA Tasks from 9 to 7
  Remove Test from Term 4
  Remove Practical from Term 3
  Move project/Assignment to Term 3
  Reduce the mark for the Assignment/Project to 50
  Allocate an individual weighting to each Task contributing towards the SBA
 mark (see Annexure 1)
The SBA component for Grades 10&11 Life Sciences from 2017
 Weighting % of Promotion
 TERM Task
 (% of SBA) Mark
 Practical
 15
 Minimum 30 marks
 1
 Test
 10
 Minimum 50 marks

 Test
 10
 Minimum 50 marks
 Practical
 2 15
 Minimum 30 marks
 Mid-year Exam
 25
 One paper - 150 marks
 25%
 Test
 10
 Minimum 50 marks
 3
 Project/Assignment*
 15
 Minimum 50 marks
 Total 100
 PRACTICAL EXAM 20%
 75%
 FINAL EXAM 80%

  NOTE: At least ONE project and ONE assignment must be done over the
 Grade10-11 years.

 Page 44 of 53
 Grade 10-12: Weighting of tasks in quarterly reporting

Tasks administered under controlled conditions (e.g. test) to weigh 75%, such that
the other task in the term weighs 25%. The exception to be only in Grade 12 Term 1
where there are 3 tasks in the term. The weighting in this case has to be 70:15:15.

Grade 10-12: Format of Question 1 in Paper 1

The first question in Paper 1 end of year exam should integrate content from across
all topics such that all the questions are pitched at cognitive Level 1. The question
should carry 30 marks, with ±5% permissible deviation.

 Page 45 of 53
 Grades 7 and 9: Misalignment between the terms/quarter in which a Project
should be administered and the teaching of Data Handling

Only in Grades 7 and 9 swop Project and Investigation as follows:
  Move the ‘Project’ from Term 3 to Term 4; and
  Move Investigation from Term 4 to Term 3.

Grade 10-11 Weightings
Swop the weightings as follows:
  Euclidean Geometry: 40 marks
  Trigonometry: 50 marks.

16. PHYSICAL SCIENCES

Grade 10 and11: Experiments
Schools should select any two experiments from CAPS for SBA for Grades 10 and
11.

 Page 46 of 53
 Page 23:
4.2 Informal or daily assessments: “It is suggested that a minimum of one informal
task be given each week”.

Page 26: 4.4.3: Project
In addition to the information provided for the project on page 26 the following
information should be added.

The steps to follow for a Project:
 1. Choose a relevant topic
 2. Brainstorm your topic (remember your audience and purpose )
 3. Plan / draw a mind map of how and what you will do
 4. Research / find information on your chosen topic
 5. Organise the information that you have collected (think from all angles)
 6. Prepare a draft document
 7. Revise your draft
 8. Prepare your final version
 9. Present your findings according to your choice
 10. Include a reference / bibliography

You can supplement your project with the following:
  Undertaking interviews
  Creating brochures
  Reading and/or writing newspaper articles
  Referring to magazine articles, advertisements (or drafting and
 article/assessment)
  Drawing or finding relevant pictures
  Taking photographs
  Making videos
  Using the internet to find relevant information (but remember - not everything
 on the Internet is equally reliable)
  Preparing a presentation or a wall chart

 Page 47 of 53
 Your project should include:
 1. The declaration for your opinion.
 2. How you collected your information/ sources used
 3. Introduction
 4. Body to revolve around the ideas you judge to be the most important
 5. Conclusion

Remember:
 1. Hand in all rough work at your final presentation.
 2. You will be assessed according to the attached rubric/ marking guideline.
 3. Provide feedback on your thinking, attitude and findings to your teacher.
 4. Your teacher will also provide you with feedback on your project.

 Page 48 of 53
 Grades 10-11: Balancing Cognitive Levels

The weightings in the CAPS for Technical Mathematics to change as shown in the
table below:

 Suggested weightings in
 Cognitive Levels
 Tech Maths

Knowledge 40 %

Routine Procedures 30 %

Complex Procedures 20 %

Problem Solving 10 %

 Page 49 of 53
 Grades 10-11: Determining the weighting for Cognitive Levels

The following weightings to be used:

 Levels Cognitive Suggested weightings

 Level 1 Remembering 40%

 Understanding Routine and
 Level 2 30%
 Application
 Level 3 Analysing 20%

 Level 4 Creating and evaluating 10%

On the number of theory papers at the end of the year and marks

 Replace Paper 1 and Paper 2 with a Single Paper for all June and Final
 examinations for Grades 10 and 11.
 Change maximum mark to 200.

On maximum marks for the Programme of Assessment, SBA, and PAT

Change the maximum mark in the Programme of Assessment to 400.
Change SBA maximum mark to 100, PAT maximum mark to 100 and
Final exam maximum mark to 200:

 Programme of Assessment 400 Marks

 SBA 100 marks
 PAT 100 marks
 Final Exam 200 marks

 Page 50 of 53
 20. TOURISM

Formal Assessment
Weighting of the Assessment Tasks in terms of Time and Mark Allocation
Specification of Forms / Types of assessment tasks
  Remove the open book test and replace with an ordinary test
  Replace the test in term 3 with a data analysis task

Grade 10 & 11(page 38)
 TERM 4
 TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3
 Promotion mark
 Task 1: Task 3: Task 5:
 75% 25% 75%
 Test Test Test Term 1+2+3=300٪3
 Task 2: = 100
 Project task PAT 1 + 2 = 50+50
 Task 6: = 100
 Task 4:
 OR 25% Midyear 75% 25% November
 Assignment : Examination paper
 Examination
 Data Analysis = 200
 Field trip
 assignment
 TOTAL 100 100 100

4.4.2 Tests (page 40)

Cognitive levels and levels of difficulty for cognitive demand

Levels of difficulty for formal assessment tasks
  Easy = 30%
  Moderate =50%
  Difficult =20%

Suggested weighting for cognitive levels
  Lower order 30% (Remembering)
  Middle order 50% (Understanding 20% Applying 30%)
  Higher order 20% (Evaluating, Analysing and Creating)

 Page 51 of 53
 Editorial Corrections /Omissions
4.4.2 Tests (page 40) 4.4.2 Tests (page 40)
Guidelines for setting of tests Include the guidelines inserted below this table.
4.4.3 Examinations ( page 41) 4.4.3 Examinations ( page 41)
Layout for the June Examination Layout included below for Grades 10-12
paper is not included for Grades
10-12
4.4.3 Examinations ( page 41) 4.4.3 Examinations ( page 41)
Include a sentence that refers to Include the sentence above the table.
Grade 10 and 11 to align text For Grade 10 and 11 the November question paper is set
and the information in the table. and assessed internally and moderated externally.
4.4.4 Practical Assessment 4.4.4 Practical Assessment Task (PAT) (page 41)
Task (PAT) (page 41)
Bullet 2: Include the information Bullet 2:
for Grades 10 and 11 The PAT for Grades 10 and 11 are set and assessed
Bullet 7: internally
Information relating to PAT only Bullet 7:
refers to Grade 12. PAT Phase 1: 100 marks
No information for Grade 10 and Completed in Term 1 and 2
11 is included. (Due date: Last week of May)
 Grade 12
Include the table: PAT Phase 2: 100 marks
 Completed in Term 2
 (Due date: Last week of July)
 PAT Phase 1: 50 marks
 Grade 10 Completed in Term 2
 and 11 PAT Phase 2: 50 marks
 Completed in Term 3

4.4.2 Tests (page 40)
GUIDELINES FOR SETTING A TEST AND A MARKING GUIDELINE
(Applicable to grades 10 and 11)
  Minimum total: 50
  Time: 1 min per question – 50 minutes actual writing time
  The cover page to include the name of the school, the date, name of the subject,
 time allocation, mark total, name of examiner and moderator
  All papers must be typed – graphics/illustrations clear
  No spelling, language or translation errors are allowed
  Include TWO sections (Section A and B)

SECTION A: Short questions (15 marks)
Multiple choice questions (5x1 marks)
Include a variety of short questions (Examples: Pairing off items; Choose the correct word,
Select the answer from a list; crossword puzzles) (10 x 1 marks)
Note: NO true/false questions are allowed.

 Page 52 of 53
 SECTION B: (35 marks)
Include:
  Questions that require a longer response for the answer.
  A question that requires a response in paragraph format ( minimum 5 marks)
  Source-based questions (maps, case studies, scenarios, extracts, pictures,
 cartoons, advertisements, flow-charts, table or graphs)
  An action verb to open the question. This gives a clear instruction for the answer.

MARKING GUIDELINE
  Must contain name of school, date, subject, marks, name of the examiner and
 moderator on the first page.
  All Marking guidelines must be typed – have no spelling errors and must reflect
 correct numbering to align with the question paper.
  Indicate the mark allocation for each fact with a tick
  Include all alternative responses.

4.4.3 Examinations (page 41)

LAYOUT OF EXAMINATION PAPERS - MIDYEAR (JUNE) EAXMINATION
Grade 10
Total: 100 Marks Duration: 1 hour 30 minutes

 Content 100 Marks
 Section A Short questions (all topics covered in term 1 and 2) 25
 Section B Map work and tour planning; 20
 Section C Tourism sectors; 40
 Section D Domestic, regional and international tourism 15

Grade 11
Total: 150 marks Duration: 2 hours 30minutes
Note* Topics in bold print are assessed in June
 Content 150 Marks
 Section A Short questions (all topics covered in term 1 and 2) 30
 Section B Foreign exchange 20
 Section C Culture and Heritage 30
 Section D Tourism sectors 50
 Section E Domestic, regional and international tourism 20

 Page 53 of 53