SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE

 National Curriculum Statement (NCS)

 Curriculum Assessment
 Policy Statement
| HOME LANGUAGE

 Foundation Phase
 Grades R - 3

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 1
 2 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
 HOME LANGUAGE

 FOUNDATION PHASE
 Grades R-3

 National Curriculum Statement (NCS)
 Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 3
 Department of Basic Education

222 Struben Street

Private Bag X895

Pretoria 0001

South Africa

Tel: +27 12 357 3000

Fax: +27 12 323-0601

120 Plein Street

Private Bag X9023

Cape Town 8000

South Africa

Tel: +27 21 465-1701

Fax: +27 21 461-8110

Website: http://www.education.gov.za

© 2014 Department of Basic Education

ISBN: 978-1-4315-1954-5
 FOREWORD BY THE MINISTER
 Our national curriculum is the culmination of our efforts over a period of seventeen
 years to transform the curriculum bequeathed to us by apartheid. From the
 start of democracy we have built our curriculum on the values that inspired our
 Constitution (Act 108 of 1996). The Preamble to the Constitution states that the
 aims of the Constitution are to:

 • heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic
 values, social justice and fundamental human rights;

 • improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person;

 • lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government
 is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by
 law; and

• build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of
 nations.

Education and the curriculum have an important role to play in realising these aims.

In 1997 we introduced outcomes-based education to overcome the curricular divisions of the past, but the experience
of implementation prompted a review in 2000. This led to the first curriculum revision: the Revised National Curriculum
Statement Grades R-9 and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (2002).

Ongoing implementation challenges resulted in another review in 2009 and we revised the Revised National
Curriculum Statement (2002) and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 to produce this document.

From 2010, we undertook the development of Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS) for the South
African Sign Language (SASL) Grades R-12 which were completed and approved as policy in July 2014. For a long
time, learners who are Deaf were persistently marginalised as they had been deprived of a home language, resulting
in their education not being one of quality. This has impacted the extent of their retention within the system and their
opportunities of studying further up to and including higher education institutions.

This ground-breaking work has however, ensured that the Department complies with the provision of the South
African Schools Act (84 of 1996) which recognises the SASL as a language of learning and teaching (LOLT). The
CAPS for SASL therefore begins a new era in the educational experiences of Deaf learners in the system and is part
of the Department’s commitment to improving the quality of education for all.

MRS AM MOTSHEKGA, MP
MINISTER
 CONTENTS
SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT . 2

1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

1.2 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2

1.3 General aims of the South African curriculum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

1.4 Time allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

 1.4.1 Foundation Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

 1.4.3 Senior Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

 1.4.4 Grades 10-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

SECTION 2: INTRODUCING SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE HOME LANGUAGE . . . . . . 7

2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

2.2 An integrated approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

2.3 Introducing South African Sign Language (SASL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

2.4 Time allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

2.5 Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

2.6 SASL Home Language skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

 2.6.1 Observing and Signing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

 2.6.2 Visual Reading and Recording focus time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

 2.6.3 Recording . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

 2.6.4 Phonological awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2.7 Fingerspelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2.8 Barriers to learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2.9 Grade R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

2.10 Learning and Teaching Support Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 6
 SECTION 3: CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE . . . 18

3.1 Observing and Signing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

3.2 Visual Reading and Viewing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

3.3 Recording . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

3.4 Teaching plans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

 Grade R: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

 Grade 1: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

 Grade 2: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36

 Grade 3: Teaching Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

GLOSSARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

 1 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND
 ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
1.1 BACKGROUND

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the
schooling sector.

To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming into
effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was developed for
each subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines
in Grades R-12.

1.2 OVERVIEW

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for learning
 and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12 (January 2012).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) replaces the two current national curricula
 statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of 31 May 2002,
 and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6 October 2003 and
 No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii) comprise the following policy
 documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January
 2012) during the period 2012-2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment
 Guidelines for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the General
 Education and Training Band, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in Government Gazette No.
 29626 of 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette No.27819 of 20 July 2005;

 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special
 needs, published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy
 document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 2
 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol
 for Assessment (Grades R-12), promulgated in Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette
 No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.

 (vi) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of
 the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment
 Policy as contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South African
 Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to determine
 minimum outcomes and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the assessment of
 learner achievement to be applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 GENERAL AIMS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN CURRICULUM

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values worth
 learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply knowledge
 and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes knowledge in
 local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 serves the purposes of:

 • equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability
 or intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment, and meaningful
 participation in society as citizens of a free country;

 • providing access to higher education;

 • facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and

 • providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is based on the following principles:

 • Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that
 equal educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;

 • Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than rote
 and uncritical learning of given truths;

 • High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at
 each grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;

 • Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

 • Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices of social
 and environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South
 Africa. The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is sensitive to issues of diversity such as
 poverty, inequality, race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;

 • Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country
 as important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

 3 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and depth
 to those of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

 • identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;

 • work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

 • organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;

 • collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

 • communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;

 • use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the environment
 and the health of others; and

 • demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem
 solving contexts do not exist in isolation.

(e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This can
 only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to learning,
 and how to plan for diversity.

 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant support
 structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based Support Teams, Institutional-Level
 Support Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers in the classroom,
 teachers should use various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those included in the Department of
 Basic Education’s Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

1.4 TIME ALLOCATION

1.4.1 Foundation Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 GRADE R GRADES 1-2 GRADE 3
 SUBJECT
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)
 Home Language 8/7 8/7
 10
 South African Sign Language 5,5 6
 First Additional Language 2/3 3/4
 4,5 5
 Mathematics 7 7 7
 Life Skills 6 6 7
 • Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)
 • Creative Arts (2) (2) (2)
 • Physical Education (2) (2) (2)
 • Personal and Social Well-being (1) (1) (1)
 TOTAL 23 23 25

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 4
 (b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8 hours and a
 minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and a maximum of 3 hours for
 Additional Language in Grades 1-2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated
 for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

 For Deaf learners who select SASL as their Home Language the time allocation is as follows:

 Home Language First Additional
 (Hours) Language
 (Hours)
 Grade R 10 10
 Grade 1 5,5 4,5 10
 Grade 2 5,5 4,5 10
 Grade 3 6 5 11

 This adjustment will enable Deaf learners to develop competency in handwriting which is not in the FAL
 curriculum and will also not be covered in the SASL Home Language curriculum as SASL does not have a
 written form.

(d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R – 2 and 2 hours as indicated by the hours
 in brackets for Grade 3.

1.4.2 Intermediate Phase
(a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Mathematics 6
 Natural Sciences and Technology 3,5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4
 • Creative Arts (1,5)
 • Physical Education (1)
 • Personal and Social Well-being (1,5)
 TOTAL 27,5

 5 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 1.4.3 Senior Phase
(a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS

 Home Language 5

 First Additional Language 4

 Mathematics 4,5

 Natural Sciences 3

 Social Sciences 3

 Technology 2

 Economic Management Sciences 2

 Life Orientation 2

 Creative Arts 2

 TOTAL 27,5

1.4.4 Grades 10-12
(a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:

 SUBJECT TIME ALLOCATION PER WEEK (HOURS)
 Home Language 4,5
 First Additional Language 4,5
 Mathematics 4,5
 Life Orientation 2
 A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group B Annexure 12 (3x4h)
 B, Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National policy pertaining
 to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, subject to the provisos
 stipulated in paragraph 28 of the said policy document.

 TOTAL 27,5

The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified above, and
may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish to offer
additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 6
 SECTION 2: INTRODUCING SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
 HOME LANGUAGE
2.1 INTRODUCTION

The Minister of Education appointed a ministerial committee, the Curriculum Management Team (CMT), to oversee
the development and implementation of South African Sign Language (SASL) as a subject to be taught in schools.
The Department of Basic Education (DBE) and the CMT appointed a writing team to develop CAPS for SASL. It was
decided to develop SASL as a Home Language (rather than a First Additional Language) to parallel the process of
attaining official status for SASL in South Africa. The decision by the SASL CMT was to make the CAPS of SASL as
close as possible to the other Home Languages in terms of structure, content and sequence.

Notes on terminology:

Deaf (with a capital D) is used to denote a distinct cultural and linguistic group of Deaf people who use South African
Sign Language as their language of choice. The Deaf Community has a distinct identity and their experience of the
world is particularly shaped by the fact that their communication is expressed by their bodies and perceived visually.
This group may include hearing children of Deaf parents and other hearing people who are users of SASL and
immerse themselves in the Deaf Community e.g. SASL interpreters.

However deaf (with a lower case d) is an adjective referring to hearing loss from an audiological point of view. Many
deaf people use spoken language to communicate. This group includes people who have lost their hearing through
e.g. age, illness and trauma.

Some verbs in common usage have a connotation of being associated only with spoken languages. These verbs
appear in the curriculum documents in inverted commas and must be used and understood in a signed context.
Examples: “listen to”, “tell”, “listening”,” say”, “a speech”, “something to say”, “read”, “voice”.

Throughout the SASL CAPS the term ‘text’ used to denote a body of work should be understood as signed texts.
These texts e.g. stories, poems, reports are presented in live SASL or may be recorded in SASL. These are NOT
written texts.

Where it is necessary for clarity, the capitalised first letter of the word is used to denote the skill or outcome and the
one in lower case is the action or the verb i.e. Signing (the skill) versus signing (the action).

Where SASL GLOSS (the signs represented in English written form) is used, it is presented in upper case as per
convention.

The skills outlined in the CAPS English Home Language document were used and adapted for SASL.

The skills in the SASL curriculum are:

 CAPS English Home Language CAPS SASL Home Language
 Listening and speaking Observing & Signing
 Phonological awareness (Foundation Phase only) Phonological Awareness
 Reading and viewing Visual Reading and Viewing
 Writing & presenting Recording
 Language structure and use (not for Foundation Phase) Language Structure and Use

 7 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 CAPS SASL Home Language Description
 Observing & Signing This skill is done with live (face-to-face) signing of a variety of signed texts

 Phonological Awareness Distinction between spoken and Sign Language phonology – phonemes
 (working with parameters) (smallest building blocks/units of a language) sounds vs. parameters
 Visual Reading and Viewing This is done with recorded SASL material
 Recording Signed texts are recorded and presented by learners
 Language Structure and Use From Intermediate Phase to FET. In the Foundation Phase this skill is
 integrated in the other skills and not taught separately

The content (knowledge, concepts and skills) contained in the National Curriculum Statement (NCS) has been
organised in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS), per term, using these headings. This CAPS
document provides teachers with:

• an introduction containing guidelines on how to use the Foundation Phase document

• content, concepts and skills to be taught per term

• guidelines for time allocation

• requirements for the Formal Assessment Activities and suggestions for informal assessment

• lists of recommended resources per grade.

2.2 AN INTEGRATED APPROACH

The Languages programme is integrated into all other subject areas. Language is used across the curriculum. Many
of the Observing and Signing Language skills will be developed within Mathematics and Life Skills, which is made up
of many subjects such as Creative Arts and Beginning Knowledge including Personal and Social Well-being, Natural
Sciences and Technology and the Social Sciences. Themes and topics can be selected from these subject areas to
provide contexts for the teaching of language skills.

2.3 INTRODUCING SOUTH AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE (SASL)

“As long as we have Deaf people on earth, we will have sign language” (George W. Veditz, 1913).

South African Sign Language (SASL) is a visual-spatial language used by the Deaf community of South Africa. SASL
is a natural language on par with spoken languages that allows users the opportunity to learn and communicate and
to express thoughts, feelings and abstract ideas.

Signed languages use a different modality to spoken languages with meaning being made by non-verbal forms
of communication including movement of the hands, upper body and face. Signs in SASL are made up of five
parameters: hand-shape, location, movement, palm orientation and the non-manual features such as specific facial
expressions that carry important grammatical information. SASL has its own distinct linguistic structure that includes
syntax, morphology, phonology and language conventions. It is not based on any written or spoken language.
Fingerspelling is not signed language, but is used by signers to represent the written form when needed (e.g. proper
nouns, acronyms and technical jargon).

“Sign Language is a real language, equivalent to any other language. Deaf persons can sign about any topic,
concrete or abstract as economically and as effectively, as rapidly and as grammatical as hearing people can. Sign
language is influenced by equivalent historical social and psychological factors as spoken language – there are rules
for attention-getting, turn-taking, story-telling; there are jokes, puns, and taboo signs; there are generational effects
observed in Sign Language and metaphors and ‘slips-of-the-hand’” (Penn, 1993: 12).

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 8
 Historically, SASL has emerged with regional variations that mirror the country’s oppressive past which segregated
the education of deaf learners. Research has shown that despite these regional and historical differences, there is a
cohesive and commonly used South African Sign Language that unifies Deaf people across the country. All local/
regional language variations (dialects) of SASL are acceptable as part of the richness of the language. SASL is not
yet accepted as an official language of South Africa although the South African School’s Act (November, 1996) states
that, “A recognised Sign Language has the status of an official language for purposes of learning at a public school”
(Chapter 2, 6.4). Civil society organizations continue to lobby for the recognition of language rights of deaf learners.

Signed language is acquired by Deaf children who are raised in Deaf families in the same way hearing children
acquire spoken language from their hearing parents. The overwhelming majority of deaf children are born to hearing
parents and acquire sign language from their peers and Deaf teachers in schools for the Deaf. It is important to
establish an age appropriate SASL language base for all learners from which they can access the curriculum and
develop literacy skills.

In developing this curriculum several assumptions were made including that the CAPS for SASL would match
as closely as possible other Home Languages in terms of structure, content and sequence; that teachers of the
curriculum would be skilled in SASL and appropriate teaching methodologies and that appropriate SASL learning and
teaching support material (LTSM) would to be identified and developed.

It is acknowledged that there is as yet insufficient research on SASL. This means that there has been borrowing
from the research done with other signed languages around the world and addendums to the SASL curriculum will
be included based on on-going research here in South Africa and internationally. Teachers of SASL are encouraged
to use their classrooms as a research resource and all language variations (dialects) are recognised as part of the
richness of the language.

2.4 TIME ALLOCATION

The following time allocations for languages come into effect in 2012. For Language in the Foundation Phase time
will be determined by the language context of the school. Schools can choose whether to give relatively more or less
time to the Home and First Additional Languages depending on the needs of their learners. The minimum time for the
Home Language and First Additional Languages is provided in brackets in the table below.

 Home Language (SASL) First Additional Language (Language of Literacy)

 Grade R 10 hours

 Grade 1 5 hours 30 minutes 4 hours 30 minutes
 Grade 2 5 hours 30 minutes 4 hours 30 minutes
 Grade 3 6 hours 5 hours

The Department does not prescribe how to break down the minimum time into the different components although
the following suggestions are made for each grade.

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE Total per week
 Observing and Signing 2 hours 30 minutes
 Visual Reading and Viewing 2 hours
 Recording 1 hour
 Total per week 5 hours 30 minutes

 9 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE Total per week
 Observing and Signing 2 hours
 Visual Reading and Viewing 1 hour 30 minutes
 Recording 1 hour
 Phonological Awareness 1 hour
 Total per week 5 hours 30 minutes

 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE Total per week
 Observing and Signing 2 hours
 Visual Reading and Viewing 2 hours
 Recording 1 hour
 Phonological Awareness 1 hour
 Total per week 6 hours

2.5 ASSESSMENT

The CAPS document provides the requirements for each Formal Assessment Activity.

 GRADE SUBJECT TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4 TOTAL
 1 Home Language 1 2 2 2 7
 2 Home Language 1 2 2 2 7
 3 Home Language 1 3 3 2 9

In Term 1 there is only one Formal Assessment Task (made up of a number of parts dealing with different aspects of
Language) in Grades 1 - 3. Schools are encouraged to conduct a baseline assessment in the first term. In addition,
suggestions are given for informal assessment that will inform daily teaching and learning but will not be formally
recorded.

2.6 SASL HOME LANGUAGE SKILLS

2.6.1 Observing and Signing

For SASL all Observing and Signing activities are done with live (face-to-face) signing (as opposed to recorded
texts).

Children are constantly developing their observing and signing skills not only in each of the components of Language
but also during other subjects. Because observing and signing are crucial to all learning, it is important that these skills
are effectively developed early in a child’s academic life. Hence, in the Foundation Phase, there is time specifically
dedicated to the development of these two important skills.

The time allocation for Observing and Signing provides for (1) the time spent at the beginning of the day and (2)
focussed observing and signing activities.

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 10
 2.6.1.1 Signing work at the beginning of the day

Each morning should begin with a brief whole class signing activity with children. Use this time to:

• Talk about the day, date, the weather chart, children who have birthdays and any special events for the day.

• Check attendance: take a roll call to identify children present / absent.

• Observe a few children share their news, ‘show and tell’ about a picture or object, discuss the diary, sports,
 concerts, topical events and story-telling. Try to observe every child’s news at least once every two weeks.

2.6.1.2 Focussed activities

Specific attention should be given to observing and signing skills throughout the Foundation Phase. The time
allocated to Signing includes Observing and Signing activities that target specific skills at least twice a week. The
CAPS document thus provides (1) daily/weekly observing and signing skills and (2) a list of other essential observing
and signing skills. This division helps teachers to plan their teaching so that their focussed observing and signing
lessons concentrate on developing 2 - 3 specific skills at a time. These focussed activities should be integrated with
Drama which is part of Creative Arts in Life Skills.

2.6.2 Visual Reading and Recording Focus Time

For SASL all Visual Reading and Viewing activities are done with recorded SASL material (as opposed to live texts).

In Grades 1 - 3, Visual Reading and Recording take place in Reading and Writing Focus Time. It is here, through
clear, focussed lessons that children will be taught to be effective viewers and authors. Time every day must be set
aside for focussed lessons covering visual reading (Shared Visual Reading, Group Guided Visual Reading, Paired
and Independent Visual Reading) and recording (Shared Recording, Group Recording and Individual Recording and
grammar activities). During this time the teacher does group guided reading with two groups while other children
are busy with consolidation activities such as comprehension, grammar and recording. Paired / independent visual
reading can also take place at the same time.

The Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS) for the Foundation Phase divides the requirements
for Visual Reading into:

• Shared Visual Reading (including Shared Recording)

• Group Guided Visual Reading

• Paired / Independent Visual Reading

2.6.2.1 Shared Visual Reading

Shared Visual Reading (and/or Shared Recording) usually happens at the start of the Visual Reading and
Recording Focus Time. The teacher works with the whole class. Shared Visual Reading will happen on two to four
days a week using a single signed text for the whole class such as DVDs, posters and pictures or any other recorded
texts. Although there will normally be only one text used per week, the texts selected for each grade should increase
in length and complexity across the year and across the grades. Children will be introduced to a range of stories,
poems and plays as well as information and graphical texts.

Each Shared Visual Reading session will have a learning focus from the following: text features, language patterns and
comprehension at a range of levels (e.g. literal, reorganization, inferential, evaluation and appreciation questions). The
first session focuses on the enjoyment and first ‘look’ at the signed text, with the children giving a personal response
to the text. In the next session the same text is used and the focus shifts to more involvement in the “reading” with the
teacher using the discussions that take place to develop vocabulary, comprehension and text structures (grammar,

 11 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 and SASL conventions). On the third, and possibly the fourth day, children “read” the text themselves and engage
in signed, practical and recorded activities based on the recorded text. Some texts might only be used over a day or
two, especially in Grade 2 and Grade 3.

2.6.2.2 Shared Recording

Where possible, the Shared Visual Reading text should inform the Shared Recording where the teacher models
how to record a text. Children engage in the composition of the text while the teacher takes on the role of facilitator
and recorded. The Shared Visual Reading text can be consulted to provide examples of language patterns, choice
of signs or other text features useful in the preparation of new texts. This modelling of the recording process helps
to prepare children for their own recording tasks. Shared Visual Reading and Shared Recording should take place
in Grades 1 - 3.

2.6.2.3 Group, Guided Visual Reading

This is an ability-group “reading” teaching strategy where all the members in the group “read” the same signed
text under the direction of the teacher and should take place every day. Guided “reading” involves the teacher in a
session with a small group of children. The teacher plans the lessons to include a range of comprehension strategies
that children will learn to apply when meeting challenges in texts. The “text talk” between teacher and children (and
children with each other) is central to this approach. During this time the teacher should not be interrupted by other
children who are doing independent activities. Each group session should be between 10 and 15 minutes long.

2.6.2.4 Forming ability groups

Signed texts are selected according to the group’s instructional “reading” level. The easiest way of establishing this
level and dividing children into groups is through observation of the learners as they “read” a signed text. Here is a
list of observable behaviour that will help in grouping children for Guided “Reading” sessions.

• The text must be “read” with ease but still have a few challenges for the learner at the comprehension level.
 The learner should recognise quickly approximately 95% of the signs.

• Learners should be “reading” at a similar pace.

• They will be interested in the text.

Steps in a Group Guided Visual Reading Lesson

I. Select an appropriate signed text:

Signed texts used for group “reading” should be at a lower level than the texts used for Shared “Reading”. Watch the
text beforehand and note any features of structure, vocabulary or syntax that may be challenging for the children.
These may provide the teacher with a teaching focus.

II. Introduction:

Introduce the type of recorded text or chapter of the DVD for the session and introduce the topic. Assist the children
to make connections with the topic and their own life experiences. Keep this discussion focused and just enough for
the children to “read” successfully (2 - 3 minutes).

III. DVD Picture Discussion or Browsing:

With very young children briefly discuss the illustrations on the cover of the DVD pointing out significant details and
raising questions about what might happen. With older children teach them to browse through the DVD paying

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 12
 attention to organisational features within the text. Where new or difficult signs appear in the DVD, the teacher
introduces these signs in the ‘text talk’, prior to the children viewing the DVD themselves. This should last for 2 - 3
minutes.

IV. First Viewing:

Children “read” the signed text individually without pausing or interruption. The teacher observes the children’s
“reading” behaviours and may select an additional teaching focus based on these observations. The teacher prompts
the children at this stage, e.g.:

• What do you expect to “read” in this DVD?

• Look at the illustrations on the DVD cover.

V. Discussion:

If children raised questions in the DVD picture discussion stage, return to these questions and discuss the answers.
The discussion could also include a focus on comprehension or on an aspect of grammar. Discuss the text bearing
in mind the range of questions that should be integrated into the discussion to develop comprehension.

VI. Second and subsequent viewings:

On subsequent viewings children “re-read” the signed text pausing and/or rewinding wherever necessary to allow for
explanation and discussion. The prime focus here is to provide opportunities to use the text to develop vocabulary,
grammar and deeper comprehension of the text.

Paired and Independent Visual Reading

Paired and Independent Visual Reading provides children with “reading” practice and encourages “reading” for
enjoyment.

Children can “re-read” their recorded texts, or they can “read” simple DVDs. The recorded text should be at a lower
level than that used for Shared and Group Guided Visual Reading. Paired Visual Reading can take place at any
time, anywhere, as a class “reading” activity. Children can sit in pairs to “read” together or two children who have
completed their tasks can “read” together while other children complete their work.

Comprehension:

During the Visual Reading lessons the teacher has many opportunities to engage children in a range of levels of
thinking and questioning. Here are a few ways of starting questions that will help to develop both lower and higher
order comprehension skills.

Literal comprehension

• Identify…. (e.g. Identify the main character in the story.)

• Point out… (e.g. Point out the car the robber was driving.)

• Find the signed sentence that… (e.g. Which signed sentence tells you the grandmother was unhappy?)

• Describe… (e.g. Describe the villain of the story.)

• Locate … (e.g. Locate the place the family was driving to in the story.)

• State… (e.g. State the name of the little black dog that ran away.)

 13 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Reorganisation

• Compare…. (e.g. Compare the two sisters. What was different?)

• List …. (e.g. List the places the grandfather visited.)

• Contrast… (e.g. Contrast the place where they were living with their new home.)

• Divide….into…. (e.g. Divide the different animals in the story into two groups, those that were kind to the girl
 and those that tried to eat her.)

• Classify… (e.g. Classify the animals in the story.)

• Summarise… (e.g. Summarise the story in not more than four sentences.)

• How is….different to… (e.g. How is the hero different from the villain?)

Inferential

• Pretend… (e.g. Pretend you were the hero. What would you have done?)

• Suppose… (e.g. If the zookeeper had left the cage door open, what would have happened?)

• Could…. (e.g. Could the man have reached the other side of the river a different way?)

• What are the implications … (e.g. What happened because of that decision?)

• What might have happened if…. (e.g. What might have happened if his father had gone to see his uncle?)

• What consequences…. (e.g. What were the consequences of her actions?)

Evaluation

• Should… (e.g. Should her grandmother have told her the story?)

• In your opinion… (e.g. In your opinion was the boy right to behave that way?)

• Do you agree… (e.g. Do you agree that leaving home was the best choice?)

• Would you have… (e.g. Would you have done the same thing if you were in that position?)

• Is it right that… (e.g. Is it right that his uncle threw him out of the house because he stole some bread?)

• What best describes… (e.g. What best describes the main character in the story?)

Appreciation

• What did you think when… (e.g. What did you think would happen when the lion opened his mouth?)

• Is this sign effective for… (e.g. Is this sign a good sign to describe the villain?)

• Do you know anyone like… (e.g. Do you know anyone who behaves like his sister?)

• Why did you like/dislike… (e.g. Why did you dislike her uncle?)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 14
 2.6.3 Recording

Through Shared Recording children develop an extended vocabulary and come to understand how sentences can
be enriched by the use of interesting adjectives and adverbs. As children become more skilled in recording their own
sentences, introduce the concept of chunks.

The CAPS uses the process approach to recording. The process involves children in planning/pre-recording, drafting
(recording), revising, editing, final recording and publishing texts for others to “read”.

2.6.4 Phonological Awareness

Phonologic awareness is the knowledge of sub-lexical structures of words/signs used in language. For spoken
languages it is the knowledge of sounds used in words, such as syllables, rhymes, alliteration, and phonemes
(e.g. C-AT, C-A-T). For signed languages it is the knowledge of basic parameters such as handshape, movement,
location, palm orientation and non-manual features. This skill will focus on understanding, identifying, differentiating
and manipulating the five parameters. Phonological awareness allows children to understand how a word/sign is
produced separately from its meaning..

This meta-linguistic ability forms part of the Language structure and use skill In the SASL curriculum.

2.7 FINGERSPELLING

Fingerspelling is not signed language, but is used by signers to represent the written form when needed (e.g. proper
nouns, acronyms, technical jargon, lexicalised or loan signs and initialised signs).

A deaf child’s understanding of fingerspelling undergoes a change as his or her knowledge of language increases.
Children initially view fingerspelling as another form of a sign, but later understand that fingerspelling is a representation
of the alphabet of English (or any other spoken language).

2.8 BARRIERS TO LEARNING

The Language periods should provide opportunities to support children with barriers to learning, enrichment for those
who are doing well, assessment activities and time to record. Recorded work must be assessed and overseen by the
teacher so that progress of each individual child can be tracked, monitored and can be used to inform the next steps
to be taken in the learning pathway. Sign texts to the children daily to ensure vocabulary growth and development.

2.9 GRADE R

The Grade R organisation of language learning is based on principles of integration and play-based learning. The
teacher should be pro-active, a mediator rather than a facilitator. A mediator makes the most of incidental learning
opportunities that arise spontaneously through a range of child-centred activities, such as free-play in the fantasy
corner or block construction site, and teacher-directed activities such as a story ‘ring’ or other ‘rings’. Issues relating
to language as well as social, emotional and other forms of development such as fine and gross motor present
themselves naturally in the routines and activities of a quality Grade R daily schedule. All these settings could provide
opportunities for a teacher to purposely intervene and ‘mediate’ incidental learning that promotes emergent language
and literacy. A traditional, formal classroom-based learning programme that is tightly structured and ‘basics bound’
should be avoided as it does not optimise language and literacy acquisition for the Grade R child. Grade R should
not be a ‘watered down’ Grade One. It has its own unique characteristics based on how children in this age group
make sense of their world and acquire the knowledge, skills, values and attitudes that will allow them to maximise the
opportunities afforded in the formal learning years.

 15 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Focus on informal and spontaneous learning in various ‘rings’ during the day. Also develop a daily programme
that allows optimal time for free play and is coupled with an acute awareness on the part of the teacher of what
could be called ‘teachable moments’, moments that arise in many instances out of the children’s own interests and
creativity. The entire school day should be viewed as possibilities for enhancing language and literacy learning; either
because of the direct intervention of the teacher, through planned mediated moments, including teacher-guided
activities or because of the numerous incidental learning opportunities that occur during the day and enable the
teacher to promote learning though utilising the ‘teachable moment’. Such moments most frequently occur during
routine periods and, of course, free play.

From a language literacy perspective, teachable moments will afford the teacher the opportunity to ask, for
example, open-ended questions or to offer an alternative suggestion to the child and so instil in the child the desire to
further his/her own learning. It becomes a question of the teacher knowing when to intervene in the learning process
and when to stand back and allow the child the opportunity of providing his/her own solution to the problem at hand.

In the Grade R year the time table is called the daily programme and it comprises three main components, namely
teacher-guided activities, routines and child-initiated activities or free play. Specific teacher-guided literacy
learning opportunities are offered during the morning language ‘ring’ (for example, theme/topic discussion/language
‘ring’; daily weather discussions; “telling” news; show and tell ‘rings’ and story time). Depending on the choice of focus
(i.e. the teacher must have a clear idea of what learning s/he wants to promote) creative art activities, perceptual
‘rings’, movement and dramatisation ‘rings’ can have a very specific language and literacy focus.

In a balanced, flexible language rich daily programme, literacy learning opportunities are offered throughout the
day. At the same time, important principles underpinning early learning are reinforced, namely, that young children
learn best through movement (kinaesthetically) and then through interacting with concrete materials (three dimensional
learning) before engaging with table top and paper and pencil activities (two dimensional representational activities).

Assessment practices in Grade R should be informal and children should not be subjected to a ‘test’ situation.
For this reason Assessment Activities have not been included in the Grade R Curriculum and Assessment Policy
Document (CAPS). Each activity used for assessment should be carefully planned so that it integrates a variety of
skills. In Grade R most of the assessment takes place through observation with the teacher recording the results of
the assessment using a checklist. Thus, as the year progresses a full picture of each child complete with challenges
and strengths is gradually built. This allows for challenges to be addressed and strengths to be maximised.

2.10 LEARNING AND TEACHING SUPPORT MATERIALS

Home Language teachers should have:

(a) A Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement document

(b) Language in Education Policy

(c) Signed language linguistic textbooks for resource purposes

(d) SASL Dictionary

(e) Literature genres

(f) A variety of media materials: news/ magazines items

(g) Access to visual aids to be used in the classroom

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 16
 Classroom resources

a) Digital cameras / video recorders / tripods

b) Memory cards / flash drives

c) TV monitors and DVD players

d) Computers / software for editing

e) A range of DVDs to accommodate different reading levels

f) OPTIONAL: Webcam facilities / broadband internet access / smart-board/ tablets / smart phone with video
 recording and viewing capabilities

 17 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 SECTION 3: CONTENT AND TEACHING PLANS FOR SOUTH
 AFRICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
This section is divided into TWO components, the contents for the language skills and the Teaching
Plans.

 3.1 Observing and Signing

 Note: Observing and Signing is done with live signing and not with recorded SASL material.
 Observing process

 • Pre-observing – to prepare/orientate learners towards signed texts (set the context, generate interest, activate
 vocabulary, predict content, activate existing knowledge and build prior knowledge).
 • During observing – recognise, match, find meaning, ask questions, confirm predictions and reflect.
 • Post-observing – ask questions, discuss what was signed, do role-play, give personal views and relate content
 to own experience.

 Learners must follow the observing process and must be able to:

 Observe a variety of signed texts (live)

 • Stories
 • Simple questions
 • Instructions
 • Announcements
 • Messages
 • Humourous stories, jokes, rhymes (Grade R) and poems
 • Greetings, news and weather (Grade R, 1)

 Communication activities

 • Conversations
 • Discussions
 • Role-plays
 • Interviews

 Observing and signing skills:

 • Demonstrate appropriate “listening” behaviour by observing without interrupting, making eye contact, showing
 respect for the signer
 • Show sensitivity when signing to others (e.g. greeting, introductions, maintaining eye contact, taking turns, not
 interrupting, attention getting strategies, adapting to your audience)
 • Observe stories and act these out
 • Ask questions for clarity and information
 • Observe and answer content questions
 • Observe and answer higher order questions
 • Observe and answer open-ended questions
 • Observe for the main idea
 • Observe for detail in stories
 • Identify cause and effect
 • Express feelings about the story (and give reasons)
 • Observe instructions and respond appropriately
 • Observe announcements and respond appropriately
 • Observe and use language imaginatively, e.g. humorous stories and jokes at grade appropriate levels

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 18
 • Comment on what was observed
• Sign simple SASL action rhymes
• Sign about pictures e.g. posters, theme charts, books
• Participate in discussions and ask questions (report back on the group’s work)
• Sign about personal experiences and feelings
• Sign more general news
• Make a signed presentation (e.g. sign personal news, describe something experienced and narrate on an
 event)
• Organise their thoughts logically in a story
• Sign a familiar story that has a beginning, middle and end
• Sign a story with a simple plot and different characters
• Role play different situations
• Interview people for a particular purpose
• Recognise and use numbers and numeral incorporation
• Recognise and use name signs appropriately
• Understand and use non-manual markers and intensifiers
• Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and appropriately (at grade level)
• Display “non-mirroring in signing” (Grade R)
• Develop vocabulary (Grade R)

 19 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS

OVERVIEW OF PHONOLOGICAL AWARENESS IN THE SASL HOME LANGUAGE GRADES 2 AND 3

GRADE 2 GRADE 3
• Recognise simple commonly used handshapes • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes
• Recognise that signs are made up of parameters • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
• Understand and group different signs which have • Understand and group different signs which have
 the same parameter the same parameter
• Understand and group common signs into • Understand and group common signs into
 parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same
 handshape or signs made in the same location) handshape or signs made in the same location)
• Distinguish between different parameters of signs • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
• Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 texts texts
• Recognise parameters in different signed texts • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 • Understand that changing one of the parameters of
 a sign can change the meaning of the sign or forms
 another sign
 • Form different signs by changing the parameters
 (e.g. handshapes and location)
 • Link handshapes to specific meanings (e.g. person
 classifiers
 • Understand that certain signs come from specific
 locations (e.g. signs to do with thinking and intellect
 are made on the forehead and signs to do with
 emotions are made on the chest)
 • Segment simple one-handed and two-handed
 (same handshape) signs into parameters
 • Segment one-handed and two-handed (different
 handshape) signs into parameters
 • Recognise that in some two-handed signs there is a
 dominant and a passive hand, e.g. HELP, STAND
 • Identify all the possible handshapes that the
 non-dominant hand can take

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 20
 3.2 Visual Reading and Viewing
Note: Visual Reading and Viewing is done with recorded SASL material and not with live signing.

Emergent “Reading” Skills (Grades R and 1)

• Recognise and point out common objects in pictures
• Distinguish between the shapes of objects that are the same, sequencing of pictures, picking out the picture
 that is different
• Match signs to objects: match signs to items on an interest table
• Match signs to pictures
• Use sequencing skills to order pictures and sign the story created
• Use memory skills to recall items seen such as shapes or concrete objects
• Build puzzles and complete pictures
• Hold picture book the right way up and page correctly when ‘reading’
• Make up own story by ‘reading’ the pictures
• Recognise and use own name-sign, name-signs of children in the class and other significant people in the
 school environment
• Observe and discuss pre-recorded signed stories and other signed texts presented
• Recall details and state main idea from a story presented by the teacher
• Act out parts of a story
• “Talk about” signed stories using signs such as BEGINNING, MIDDLE, END
• Draw pictures of stories
• Interpret pictures to construct ideas, make up own story and sign the pictures
• Discuss handling and care of DVDs and video equipment

• Use DVD cover/ pictures to predict what the story is about
Fingerspelling

• Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling with increasing speed and accuracy.

Visual reading and viewing will consist of shared visual reading as a class with the teacher. This is followed by
small group work with the teacher, followed by paired/independent reading for information and enjoyment.

The visual reading process consists of:

• “Pre-reading” activities

• “During reading” activities

• “Post-reading” activities

 21 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 “Pre-reading” activities

Learners may be prepared for the signed text in various ways depending on the type of signed text and the level
of the learner. “Pre-reading” activates associations and previous knowledge.

• Use visual cues e.g. pictures and DVD covers to predict and interpret what the story/signed text is about, and
 tell a story
• Suggest purpose and audience
• Express personal response to images

“During reading” activities

The recorded signed text (e.g. DVD) will be paused during “reading” when needed for the following activities to
happen.

• Identify the main idea, the characters and the plot
• Infer meaning of unfamiliar signs and images by using contextual clues
• “Re-reading”, “reading” further on, pausing
• Ask questions
• Answer higher order questions

“Post-reading” activities

• Explain whether or not a story was liked and why
• Give an opinion on what was “read”
• Express feeling about the poem
• Draw conclusions
• Justify responses
• Answer open-ended and higher order questions based on the signed text
• Discuss the sequence of events, plot, setting, cultural values and cause and effect relations
• Identify key details in what was “read”
• Confirm purpose and audience

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 22
 3.3 Recording: process, content, strategies and signed texts
Good recording skills need to be developed and supported. Although visual reading is an important source of input,
it is only through presenting that presenting skills are developed. The recording process consists of the following:

• Planning / Pre-recording
• Drafting (recording)
• Revising
• Editing
• Final recording
• Publishing

During the recording process learners should do the following:

Planning / Pre-recording

Use planning strategies to initiate and draft a piece of formal SASL recording:

• select a formal SASL text form to suit the purpose and audience (e.g. stories, recipes, instructions, dialogues
 using role-shift and “letter” to a friend or family member)
• record a selection of short formal SASL texts for different purposes (e.g. message (“letter”) to a friend, instruc-
 tions)
• where appropriate, record a title that reflects the content

Build vocabulary and record signs so that they can be “read” and understood by others:
• record signs that represent age appropriate vocabulary
• record new signs in contextual sentences or phrases

Use pre-recording strategies:

• use various pre-recording strategies to gather information and choose a topic (e.g. creates and uses drawings,
 brainstorming, signing with friends, use visual images)

Drafting (recording)

Record for different purposes:

• organise thoughts logically
• compile lists
• record simple labels or captions for drawings
• create simple texts such as birthday messages, dialogues, poems, simple interviews, one to two chunk stories
 and personal experiences and events
• use simple strategies for getting and recording information, such as carrying out simple surveys (e.g. age and
 gender of learners)
• collect suitable pictures and graphics to illustrate recorded text
• sign a title that reflects the content
• produce a first draft
• view draft and get feedback from others (classmates)

 23 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 Revising, editing, final recording

Revise formal SASL recording:

• discuss own and others’ recording to get or give feedback
• edit own recording (e.g. deleting or adding signs to clarify meaning, re-ordering sentences, checking and cor-
 recting signs and formal SASL conventions)
• revise own recording after getting feedback from others

Record the final signed presentation

• complete a recording task within a set time

Publishing (Grades 2 and 3)

‘Publish’ (make public ) own recording:

• share work with others by showing the recording in the classroom
• introduce the recorded text to the audience
• share recording with intended audience, such as family or friends
• make own DVDs or contribute to class anthologies and/or SASL recordings

Fingerspelling:

• Use fingerspelling accurately (right direction, rhythmically) and appropriately as per SASL conventions, e.g.
 proper nouns (people and place names), titles of texts
• Use acronyms appropriate to different media and audiences

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 24
 RECOMMENDED TEXTS/RESOURCES FOR THE PHASE

Classroom resources

• Digital cameras / video recorders / tripods

• Memory cards / flash drives

• TV monitors and DVD players

• Computers / software for editing

• A range of DVDs to accommodate different reading levels

• OPTIONAL: Webcam facilities / broadband internet access / smart-board/ tablets/ smart phone
 with video recording and viewing capabilities

Grade R

• Theme charts, books with pictures and posters
• Photographs
• Colour charts
• Number charts
• Games (e.g. Terence Parkin hand-shape flash cards)
• Objects related to themes and topics
• Story board pieces
• Pictures to sequence/picture stories
• Picture puzzles (e.g. Spot the difference, Where’s Wally?)
• Jig-saw puzzles
• Toys e.g. blocks, construction toys, cars, dolls, puppets, masks, etc.
• Plastic bottles, jars, boxes, etc.
• DVDs with stories, poems, action rhymes, mime and sign songs
• Deaf television programmes (e.g. DTV, SABC programmes, Zwakala)
• Sign language dictionary for young children
• Simple instructions
• Simple descriptions
• Children’s animated films (no voice)
• Recorded name signs
• Announcements
• Messages

Grade 1

• Theme charts, books with pictures and posters
• “Logos”
• Recorded name signs
• Pictures or recordings of finger spelling
• Messages
• Announcements

 25 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Familiar advertisements
• Photographs
• Colour charts
• Number charts / time-line charts
• Games (e.g. hand-shape flash cards)
• Objects/props related to themes and topics, puppets, masks, etc.
• Story board pieces, jig-saws, tangrams and matching puzzles
• Pictures to sequence/picture stories
• Costumes for role-play
• DVDs with stories, fables, legends, poems, action rhymes, mime and sign songs
• Deaf television programmes (e.g. DTV, SABC programmes, Zwakala)
• DVD player, television, video camera (tapes, memory sticks, etc.)
• Sign language dictionary for young children
• Instructions of growing complexity
• Simple descriptions
• Children’s animated films (no voice)

Grade 2

• Pictures and posters
• Magazine pictures and advertisements
• Photographs
• Games (e.g. hand-shape flash cards)
• Objects/props related to themes and topics, puppets, masks, etc.
• Pictures to sequence/picture stories
• Costumes for role-play and other signed activities
• DVDs with stories, fables, legends, poems, action rhymes, mime and sign songs
• Deaf television programmes (e.g. DTV, SABC programmes, Zwakala)
• DVD player, television, video camera (tapes, memory sticks, etc.)
• Sign language dictionary for young children
• Instructions of growing complexity
• Rules (e.g. rules for a game)
• Lists
• Descriptions
• Dialogues and conversations
• Jokes
• Children’s animated films (no voice)
• Calendar
• Recorded signs related to learning areas eg. Maths and Science
• Graphs / table charts
• Messages e.g. Thank you / get well
• News items

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 26
 Grade 3

• Pictures and posters
• Television advertisements
• Photographs
• Games (e.g. handshape flash cards)
• Objects/props related to themes and topics, puppets, masks, etc.
• Pictures to sequence/picture stories
• Picture comics
• Picture flow-diagrams / graphs / table charts
• Picture mind maps
• Costumes for role-play and other signed activities
• DVDs with stories (fiction and non-fiction), fables, legends and poems
• Deaf television programmes (e.g. DTV, SABC programmes, Zwakala)
• DVD player, television, video camera (tapes, memory sticks, etc.)
• Sign language dictionary for young children
• Instructions of growing complexity
• Lists
• Descriptions
• Dialogues and conversations
• Jokes
• Television broadcasts in SASL (e.g. stories, announcements, new, weather, interviews, sport)
• Children’s films (with signing, no voice)
• Recorded signs related to learning areas e.g. Life-skills
• Signed announcements
• Directions e.g. simple maps
• Instructional texts e.g. recipes and experiments

 27 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 3.4 Teaching Plans

 Grade R

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording

CAPS
 TERM 1
 Daily activities in all areas of SASL and other subjects Emergent “reading” skills • Draw or paint pictures to convey messages during creative art activities
 • Observe and sign greetings, introductions and name-signs and use • Distinguish between the shapes of objects that are the same, sequencing such as about a personal experience
 appropriate attention getting strategies of pictures, picking out the picture that is different • Role-play recording in play situations
 • Observe attentively to simple questions and announcements and • Use sequencing skills to order three pictures and relate the story created • Contribute ideas for a class news programme by means of drawings
 responds appropriately • Use memory skills to recall items seen such as shapes or concrete
 • Observe simple instructions and act on them objects
 • Observe without interrupting • Build puzzles and completing pictures
 • Observe short signed stories with enjoyment and join in choruses where • Hold picture book the right way up and page correctly
 appropriate • Make up own story by ‘reading’ the pictures
 • Sign simple signed rhymes and do actions • Recognise own name-signs and name-signs of at least five other
 • Observe and recall simple sign sequences. Start with three signs and children in the class
 build up to four or more so that visual memory is developed Shared Visual Reading
 • Sign about pictures in e.g. posters, theme charts and books. Related to • “Read” simple signed stories as a whole class with the teacher (Shared
 a minimum of four themes per term. Visual Reading)
 • “Tell” stories and “retell” stories of others in their own way • Discuss and describe characters in stories
 Use SASL to develop concepts in all subjects • Draw pictures capturing main idea of the stories
 • Develop SASL to understand concepts, e.g. shape, colour, age, time, • Sequence pictures in a story
 sequence
 • Respond to stories through movement and drama activities
 Use SASL to think and reason
 • Identify and describe similarities and differences
 Independent Visual Reading
 • Match things that go together, and compare things that are different
 “Read” independently signed texts for pleasure from a DVD library
 • Group familiar items, e.g. put all toys in box, books on shelves, crayons
 in tins or sort according to colour
 • Identify parts from the whole e.g. names and points to parts of a house
 Use SASL to investigate and explore
 • Ask questions
 • Give explanations
 • Solve and complete at least five or more piece jig-saw puzzles
 Process information
 • Pick out selected information from a description
 Use visual and pictorial cues to make meaning
 • Recognise and point out common objects in pictures
 • Participate in activities to perceive objects in the foreground and the
 background and to separate them meaningfully e.g. find an image in a
 busy or detailed picture
 • Play games such as ‘Where is it?’ finding an object hidden in a classroom

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 among other items
 • Group identical objects/pictures
 • View nearly identical objects/pictures, pick out the one that is different
 and explain why it is different
 • Arrange a set of three pictures in such a way that they form a story and

 28
 a logical sequence of events; sign the story created by the pictures
 • Play a memory game, e.g. put different objects on the table, children
 look at these, teacher covers objects and children have to recall what
 they saw on the table
 • Complete a puzzle or picture
 GRADE R TERM 2

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording

 29
 Daily activities in all areas of SASL and other subjects Emergent “reading” • Draw pictures to convey a message such as own ‘news’
 • Observe and sign greetings, introductions and name-signs and use • Hold picture book the right way up and turn pages correctly when • Role play recording in play situations
 appropriate attention getting strategies ‘reading’
 • Observe two or three part instructions, announcements and responds • Interpret pictures to make up own story: ‘reads’ the pictures
 appropriately (e.g. CRAYONS COLLECT, SHELF PUT) • Recognise and use the name-signs of significant people in the school
 • Observe without interrupting, taking turns to sign environment
 • Observe stories and act these out • View and discuss pre-recorded signed stories. Recall details and state
 • “Tell” stories and “retell” stories of others in their own way main idea
 • Sign rhymes with the whole class • Act out parts of a story
 • Sequence pictures of a story • “Talk about” signed stories using signs such as BEGINNING, MIDDLE,
 END
 • Participate in discussions and ask questions
 Shared Visual Reading
 • Sign about pictures in e.g. posters, theme charts and books. Related to
 a minimum of four themes per term • “Read” signed texts such as stories and poems stories as a whole class
 with the teacher (Shared Visual Reading)
 • Observe and recall in order simple sign sequences. Start with three
 signs and build up to four or more so that visual memory is developed • Discuss and describe characters in stories
 Use SASL to develop concepts in all subjects • Draw pictures capturing the main idea of stories
 • Use SASL to develop concepts in all subject areas such as quantity, • Arrange a set of pictures in such a way that they form a story and then
 direction, time, sequence, colour, age sign the story
 Use SASL to think and reason • Respond to stories through movement and drama activities
 • Identify and describe similarities and differences • Predict what will happen next in the story using familiar stories and
 picture cues
 • Match things that go together, and compare things that are different
 • Respond to stories through creative art: paints a picture of the story
 • Group things according to colour, shape or size
 Independent Reading
 • Identify parts from the whole, e.g. name parts of a car
 • “Read” independently signed texts for pleasure from a DVD library
 Use SASL to investigate and explore
 • Ask questions and ask for explanation
 • Give explanations and ask for clarification
 • Solve and complete ten or more piece jig-saw puzzles
 Process information
 • Pick out selected information from a description
 Use visual and pictorial cues to make meaning
 • Look carefully at pictures and sign about common experiences
 • Find specified images in a busy or detailed picture

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Play games such as ‘Search!’ finding an object hidden in a classroom
 among other items
 • Group identical objects/pictures
 • View nearly identical objects/pictures, pick out the one that is different
 and explain why it is different
 • Order a sequence of pictures and sign the story created
 GRADE R TERM 3

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording
 Daily activities in all areas of SASL and other subjects Emergent “reading” skills

CAPS
 • Observe and sign greetings, introductions and name-signs and use • Can match signs to objects: matches signs to items on an interest table • Draw pictures to convey a message about a personal experience and
 appropriate attention getting strategies • Hold picture books the right way up and turn pages correctly when use this as a starting point for presenting
 • Observe attentively to questions and give answers ‘reading’ • Role play recording in play situations
 • Observe announcements and respond appropriately • Interpret pictures to make up own story: ‘read’ the pictures • Contribute ideas and sign sentences for a class news programme/group
 • Observe a complex list of instructions and respond appropriately • Act out parts of a story or poem story
 • Observe without interrupting, show respect for the signer and take turns • Recall details and state main idea from a story presented by the teacher • Use signs like BEGINNING, MIDDLE and END when discussing signed
 to sign texts
 • Draw pictures of stories or poems
 • “Tell” stories and “retell” other children’s stories in their own way • View and discuss stories and other signed texts presented.
 • Sign rhymes on their own • Use signs like BEGINNING, MIDDLE, END when discussing signed text
 • Observe longer stories and show understanding by answering questions Shared Visual Reading
 related to the story
 • “Read” signed texts as a whole class with the teacher
 • Sequence pictures of a story
 • “Read” class or group generated signed texts
 • Observe and recall, in order, simple sign sequences. Start with three
 signs and build up to four or more so that visual memory is developed • Make links to own experience when “reading” signed stories or watching
 signed TV programmes with the teacher
 • Sign about pictures in e.g. posters, theme charts and books. Related to
 a minimum of four themes per term • Describe the characteristics of characters in stories or television and
 give opinions
 Use SASL to develop concepts in all subjects
 • Identify the sequence of events in simple stories
 • Use SASL to develop concepts in all subjects, e.g. Mathematics:
 quantity, size, time, shape, age, direction and colour during group • Use cover of DVD and illustrations throughout the signed text to predict
 activities or informally during free play storyline
 Use SASL to think and reason • Join in the shared visual reading of signed texts with increasing
 confidence and enjoyment
 • Identify and describe similarities and differences
 • Answer a range of questions based on the story “read”
 • Match things that go together and compare things that are different
 Independent Reading
 • Group things according to learners’ own criteria
 • “Read” signed texts independently for pleasure from a DVD library
 • Identify parts from the whole, e.g. parts that make up a picture
 Use SASL to investigate and explore
 • Ask questions and use pictures in books for explanations
 • Give explanations and offer solutions
 • Complete between ten or twenty piece jig-saw puzzles
 Process information
 • Pick out selected information from a description
 Use visual and pictorial cues to make meaning
 • Understand that pictures and photographs convey meaning about
 events, people, places and things and sign about these
 • Look carefully at pictures and sign about common experiences
 • Isolate images from the foreground and the background in pictures and
 simple designs

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 • Find objects hidden in a classroom among other items and guide peers
 to items using simple directions
 • Sequence pictures and relate the story created

 30
 GRADE R TERM 4

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording

 31
 Daily activities in all areas of SASL and other subjects Emergent “reading” skills
 • Observe and sign greetings, introductions and name-signs and use • Match signs to pictures • Draw pictures to convey a message about a personal experience and
 appropriate attention getting strategies • Interpret pictures to construct ideas, make up own story and sign the use this as a starting point for recording
 • Observe attentively to questions and give answers pictures • Role play recording in play situations
 • Observe announcements and respond appropriately • Act out a story or poem • Contribute ideas and signed sentences for a class news programme/
 • Pass on messages • Recall details and state main idea group story
 • Observe a complex list of instructions and respond appropriately • Draw pictures of stories or poems • Use recording technology with increased confidence and ease
 • Observe without interrupting, show respect for the signer and take turns • Discuss DVD handling and care • Use signs like BEGINNING, MIDDLE, END, SIGN, SENTENCE, SAME,
 to sign DIFFERENT
 • Observe longer stories and show understanding by answering questions Shared Visual Reading
 related to the story
 • “Read” signed texts as a whole class with the teacher
 • “Tell” stories and “retell” other children’s stories in their own way
 • “Read” class generated texts such as signed sentences in a group with
 • Sign rhymes on their own confidently the teacher
 • Sequence pictures of a story • Make links to own experience when “reading” signed stories or watching
 • Participate in discussions and ask questions signed TV programmes with the teacher
 • Observe and recall, in order, simple sign sequences. Start with three • Describe the characteristics of characters in stories or signed TV
 signs and build up to four or more so that visual memory is developed programmes and give opinions
 • Sign about pictures in e.g. posters, theme charts, books related to a • Identify the sequence of events in simple signed stories
 minimum of four themes per term • Use the cover of a DVD and illustrations throughout the signed text to
 Use SASL to develop concepts in all subjects predict storyline
 • Use SASL to develop concepts in all subjects, e.g. quantity, size, shape, • Join in the shared visual reading of signed texts with increasing
 direction, colour, speed, time, age and sequence confidence and enjoyment
 Use SASL to think and reason • Answer a range of questions based on the story read
 • Identify and describe similarities and differences
 • Match things that go together, and compare things that are different Independent Reading
 • Group things according to learners’ own criteria and more complex • “Read” signed texts independently for pleasure from a DVD library
 criteria such as textures
 • Identify parts from the whole in a 2-Dimensional format and then
 construct in a 3-Dimensional format, i.e. copy a picture or a pattern from
 a 2-D card into a 3-D shape using blocks, plastic shapes or play dough
 Use SASL to investigate and explore
 • Ask questions and use pictures in books for explanations
 • “Listen to” problems and offer solutions

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Complete 20 piece or more jig-saw puzzles
 Process information
 • Pick out selected information from a signed description. For example,
 “listen for” the starting time of an event from an announcement
 Use visual and pictorial cues to make meaning
 • Understand that pictures and photographs convey meaning about
 events, people and things and sign about these
 • Use pictures to predict the content of stories
 • Identify the foreground and background in pictures as separate elements
 • Play direction games with teacher and friends, e.g. ‘Snakes and Ladders’
 board game
 • Match pictures, signs and drawings of signs
 Grade 1

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording

CAPS
 TERM 1
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of SASL and other subjects • Draw pictures to convey a message, e.g. about a personal experience
 • Observe and sign greetings, introductions and name-signs and use Daily Visual Reading Activities • Record a caption for a drawing or picture
 appropriate attention getting strategies • Contribute ideas for a class story captured by the teacher on charts
 • Observe without interrupting Emergent “reading” skills (taught in Shared and Group Guided Visual to create new texts for visual reading and display in the classroom
 • Sign about personal experiences Reading lessons) “reading” corner

 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing activities • Use DVD cover/ pictures to predict what the story is about
 Weeks 1 - 5 • Collect and “read” logos from their everyday environment
 • Observe simple instructions (classroom routines) and respond • Discuss handling and care of DVDs and video equipment
 appropriately • Observe and discuss stories and other signed texts presented
 • Observe stories with interest and act out part of the story Shared Visual Reading
 • Answer questions, e.g. questions related to personal details • “Read” as a whole class with the teacher pre-recorded texts such as
 Weeks 6 - 10 class stories and poems developed in shared recording sessions
 • Sequence pictures of a story communicating through “retelling” the Group Guided Visual Reading
 sequence of ideas • The whole group “reads” the same signed story
 • Sign about pictures, e.g. in posters, theme charts and books
 • Participate in discussions, taking turns to sign and respecting others in
 the group
 Describe objects in terms of e.g. colour, size or shape, using the correct
 vocabulary

 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 • Sequence pictures of a story communicating through “retelling” the • Discuss handling and care of DVDs and video equipment/technology • Contribute ideas for a class story captured by the teacher on charts
 sequence of ideas to create new texts for visual reading and display in the classroom
 • Sign about pictures, e.g. in posters, theme charts and books “reading” corner

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 32
 GRADE 1 TERM 2

 Observing and Signing

 33
 Visual Reading and Viewing Recording
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of SASL and other subjects Daily Visual Reading Activities Shared, Group and Independent Recording
 • Observe without interrupting, taking turns to sign in whole class and Shared Visual Reading • Draw pictures to convey a message and sign a label or caption, e.g.
 group discussions • “Read” pre-recorded signed texts as a whole class with teacher about a personal experience
 • Sign about personal experiences • Use pictures to predict what the story is about • Record own news
 • Identify parts from the whole, e.g. parts of a bicycle, parts of a plant • Use clues and pictures in the text for understanding • Compile a list of signs according to instructions e.g. different kinds of
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and appropriately food
 • Discuss the story, identifying the main idea in the text and the main
 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing activities characters • Contribute ideas for a class story (Shared Recording)

 Weeks 1 - 5 • Answer a wide variety of types of questions based on the signed texts • Record with illustrations a caption or short sentence on a topic to
 “read” including higher order questions contribute to a signed text for the “reading” corner
 • Observe instructions (group and daily routines) and respond
 appropriately • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling
 • Pass on messages Group Guided Visual Reading
 • Observe stories with interest and draw a picture to show understanding • The whole group “reads” the same signed story
 • Answer closed and open-ended questions Paired/Independent Visual Reading
 Weeks 6 - 10 • “Read” with a partner from prepared or known signed texts
 • Describe objects in terms of e.g. age, direction or sequence using the • “Reread” familiar signed texts such as those read in Shared Visual
 correct vocabulary Reading sessions
 • Observe stories and identify the main idea
 • Sequence the pictures of a story
 • Participate in classroom discussions
 • Ask questions related to signed stories
 • Understand and use appropriate vocabulary and language for different
 subjects

 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 • Observe instructions (group and daily routines) and respond • Use pictures to predict what the story is about • Record own news
 appropriately • Discuss the story, identifying the main idea in the text and the main Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 • Pass on messages characters • Compile a list of signs according to instructions e.g. different kinds of
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: Formal Assessment Activity 2: food

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Describe objects in terms of e.g. age, direction or sequence using the • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling
 correct vocabulary
 GRADE 1 TERM 3

 Observing and Signing
 Visual Reading and Viewing Recording

CAPS
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of SASL and other subjects Daily Visual Reading Activities Shared, Group and Independent Recording:
 • Observe instructions and announcements and respond appropriately Shared Visual Reading • Record a message such as a get well or birthday greeting
 • Observe without interrupting showing respect for the signer • “Read” pre-recorded signed texts as a whole class with teacher • Record at least two sentences of own news
 • Sign about personal experiences • Identify the sequence of events and the setting of the story • Fingerspell correctly
 • Understand and use appropriate vocabulary and language for different • Use cover of DVD to predict storyline and possible ending • With help use referencing (e.g. indexing, proforms, use of classifiers,
 subjects • Recognise cause and effect in a story eye gaze, space) correctly when recording
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and appropriately • Answer higher order questions based on the signed text • Contribute ideas and signs for a class story in Shared Recording
 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing activities sessions
 • Give an opinion on what was “read”
 Weeks 1 - 5 • Record with illustrations a few short sentences on a topic to contribute
 • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling to a signed text for the “reading” corner
 • Observe a story with interest and enjoyment and draw a picture about it
 • Sequence the pictures of a story Group Guided Visual Reading
 • Role play different situations, using appropriate language • The whole group views the same signed story
 • Participate in discussions, asking and answering questions
 Weeks 6 - 10 Paired/Independent Reading
 • “Listen for” the detail in stories and answer open-ended questions • “Read” with a partner
 • Identify similarities and differences using the correct vocabulary • “Read” own and others’ recording
 • Use an increasing vocabulary when signing • “Read” signed text used in Shared Visual Reading sessions and texts
 from the classroom “reading” corner

 ASSESSMENT
 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: • Record a message such as a get well or birthday greeting
 • Role play different situations, using appropriate language • Recognise cause and effect in a story • Fingerspell correctly
 • Answer higher order questions based on the signed text
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: • Give an opinion on what was “read” Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 • Identify similarities and differences using the correct vocabulary • Record with illustrations a few short sentences on a topic to contribute
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: to a signed text for the “reading” corner
 • “Read” own and others’ recording

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 34
 GRADE 1 TERM 4

 Observing and Signing

 35
 Visual Reading and Viewing Recording
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of SASL and other subjects. Daily Visual Reading Activities Shared, Group and Independent Recording
 • Observe without interrupting, taking turns to sign and asking questions Shared Visual Reading • Contribute ideas for and help to revise a class/group story (Shared
 for clarification • “Read” pre-recorded signed texts as a whole class with teacher Recording)
 • Sign about personal experiences and feelings • Use DVD cover to predict what the DVD is about • Discuss ideas for recording with classmates
 • Observe stories and express feelings about the story • Identify the initial problem in a story that sets the story in motion • Record at least three sentences of own news or creative story
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and appropriately • Use clues and pictures in the DVD for understanding • Record with illustrations sentences on a topic to contribute to a signed
 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing activities text for the visual reading corner
 • Identify the sequence of events in what was “read”
 Weeks 1 - 5 • Use fingerspelling where needed
 • Recognise cause and effect in a story
 • Observe, enjoy and respond to humourous stories and jokes using • Begin to indicate time/tense correctly in recording
 • Answer open-ended questions based on the signed text
 language imaginatively • Form the plurals of familiar signs appropriately
 • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling
 • Participate in discussions and report back on behalf of the group • Uses placement (prepositions) correctly
 Group Guided Reading
 • Use simple strategies for finding information, e.g. carry out a survey on • Organise information into a simple graphic form such as chart or timeline,
 how children come to school • The whole group ”read” the same signed story e.g. use a chart to record the results of a survey on how children come
 Weeks 6 - 10 • Monitor self when “reading”, both recognition of signs and comprehension to school

 • Observe instructions and announcements and respond appropriately Paired/Independent Visual Reading

 • Sign a familiar story which has a beginning, middle and end, varying • “Read” own recording, starting to correct errors
 signing mode • “Read” signed texts used in Shared Visual Reading sessions and DVDs
 • Answer closed and open-ended questions from the classroom “reading” corner

 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 • Use simple strategies for finding information, e.g. carry out a survey on • Identify the sequence of events in what was “read” Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 how children come to school • Form the plurals of familiar signs appropriately
 • Participate in discussions and report back on behalf of the group Formal Assessment Activity 2: • Uses placement (prepositions) correctly
 • Read” own recording, starting to correct errors
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: • Monitor self when “reading”, both recognition of signs and comprehension Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 • Observe instructions and announcements and respond appropriately • Organise information into a simple graphic form such as chart or

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 timeline, e.g. use a chart to record the results of a survey on how
 children come to school
 Grade 2

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Phonological Awareness

CAPS
 TERM 1
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of SASL and Daily Visual Reading Activities Shared, Group and Independent Recording • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes
 other subjects Shared Visual Reading • Draw pictures to convey a message e.g. about a • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
 • Observe without interrupting, showing respect for • Interpret pictures, photographs or an advertisement personal experience
 the signer to make up own story. ‘Read’ the picture, photograph • Contribute ideas and signs for a class story (Shared
 • Take turns to sign or advertisement Recording)
 • Sign about personal experiences • “Read” DVDs as a whole class with teacher (shared • Record a list using SASL conventions to separate
 • Use correct signs for the context such as an visual reading) and describe the main ideas the items e.g. tasks for the day
 invitation • Use visual cues to predict what the story is about: • Record at least three sentences of own news or
 • Suggest solutions to a problem especially during the cover of the DVD, illustrations in the signed text creative story using appropriate SASL conventions
 Mathematics (e.g. story sums) • Express a personal response to a signed text “read” and fingerspelling

 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and • Identify key details in what was “read” such as the • Record with illustrations sentences (2 - 4 sentences)
 appropriately sequence of events on a topic to contribute to a signed text for the
 classroom “reading” corner
 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing • Answer higher order questions before, during and
 activities after “reading” a shared signed text
 Weeks 1 - 5 • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling
 • Observe a story with enjoyment and answer Group Guided Visual Reading
 questions related to the story • The whole group “reads” the same story based on
 • Repeat a sequence of events in the story correctly the instructional “reading” level of the group
 • Observe more complex instructions containing and • Use pictures in text for understanding
 respond appropriately • Use contextual decoding skills when “reading”
 Weeks 6 - 10 • Show an understanding of SASL conventions
 • Sign a story that has a beginning, middle and end Paired/Independent Visual Reading
 • Participate in discussions, asking and answering • “Reads” independently: a variety of signed texts
 questions and suggesting ideas from the library or classroom “reading” corner

 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 • Repeat a sequence of events in the story correctly • Express a personal response to a signed text “read” • Record a list using SASL conventions to separate • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes
 • Observe more complex instructions containing and • Identify key details in what was “read” such as the the items e.g. tasks for the day
 respond appropriately sequence of events
 • Answer higher order questions before, during and
 after “reading” a shared signed text
 • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 36
 GRADE 2 TERM 2

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Phonological Awareness

 37
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of SASL and other Daily Visual Reading Activities Shared, Group and Independent Recording • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes
 subjects Shared Visual Reading • Participate in a discussion to choose a topic to • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
 • Observe without interrupting, showing respect for the • Use visual cues to identify the purpose of record about • Understand and group different signs which have
 signer advertisements and the intended audience • Record an expressive text such as a thank you the same parameter
 • Take turns to sign, showing sensitivity to others and • “Read” DVD as a whole class with teacher (shared message • Understand and group common signs into
 giving positive feedback visual reading) and discuss cause-effect relations • Record own story of at least one chunk using a parameter families (e.g. signs made using the
 • Sign about personal experiences • Identify key details in what was “read” such as main frame same handshape or signs made in the same
 • Understand and use appropriate language for characters and setting • Record one chunk on personal experiences or location)
 different subjects such as language specific to • “Read” poems as a whole class with teacher events e.g. daily news
 Mathematics (shared visual reading) • Record with illustrations sentences on a topic to
 • Suggest solutions to a problem especially during • Answer higher order questions based on the signed contribute to a signed text for the “reading” corner
 Mathematics (e.g. story sums) text “read” • Use the recording process (drafting, recording and
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and • Give an opinion on what was “read” editing)
 appropriately • Uses appropriate SASL grammar
 • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling
 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing • Use fingerspelling where appropriate
 activities Group Guided Visual Reading
 • “Read” the same signed story as a whole group • Indicate time/tense correctly
 Weeks 1 - 5
 • Use contextual decoding skills when “reading” • Use placement (prepositions) correctly
 • Observe stories for a longer period with enjoyment
 Paired/Independent Visual Reading • Show own recording to a partner
 • Express feelings about a story or poem
 • Identify similarities and differences • “Read” with a partner
 • Compare and group things explaining grouping such • “Read” own and others’ recordings
 as things with 4 legs or 2 legs • “Read” independently a variety of signed texts (e.g.
 Weeks 6 - 10 simple fiction)
 • Observe more complex instructions and respond
 appropriately
 • Observe stories and identify the main idea, details
 and sequence of events
 • Answer closed and open-ended questions and give
 reasons for answers
 • Respond to jokes
 • Make up own stories using imaginative language
 • Participate in discussions and ask questions for
 clarity

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 • Identify similarities and differences • Use visual cues to identify the purpose of • Record an expressive text such as a thank you • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
 • Compare and group things explaining grouping such advertisements and the intended audience message
 as things with 4 legs or 2 legs Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: Formal Assessment Activity 2: • Understand and group common signs into
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: • “Read” poems as a whole class with teacher • Record with illustrations sentences on a topic to parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same
 • Answer closed and open-ended questions and give (shared visual reading) contribute to a signed text for the “reading” corner handshape or signs made in the same location)
 reasons for answers • Give an opinion on what was “read” • Use the recording process (drafting, recording and
 • Participate in discussions and ask questions for editing)
 clarity
 GRADE 2 TERM 3

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Phonological Awareness
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of SASL and other Daily Visual Reading Activities Shared, Group and Independent Recording • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes

CAPS
 subjects Shared Visual Reading • Participate in a discussion to choose a topic to • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
 • Observe without interrupting, showing respect for the • “Read” DVD as a whole class with teacher, identify record about • Understand and group different signs which have
 signer and asking questions for clarification the sequence of events and the setting • Record an expressive text e.g. a get well message the same parameter
 • Sign about personal experiences and more general • Use the cover of a DVD for prediction • Draft, record and ‘publish’ own story • Understand and group common signs into
 news parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same
 • Answer higher order questions based on the signed • Record 1-2 chunks on personal experiences or
 • Use an ever-increasing vocabulary when signing text “read” events handshape or signs made in the same location)
 • Participate in discussions, asking and answering • Give an opinion on what was “read” • Uses correct SASL grammar • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 questions • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 • Identify some synonyms and antonyms • Use fingerspelling where appropriate
 • Suggest solutions to a problem especially during texts
 Mathematics (e.g. story sums) • Interpret information from simple tables such as • Indicate time/tense correctly
 calendar • Identify and use nouns and verbs correctly
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and
 appropriately • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling • Identify and use referencing correctly (e.g. indexing,
 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing Group Guided Visual Reading proforms, use of classifiers, eye-gaze, space)
 activities • The whole group “reads” the same signed story • Record and discuss own recording with a partner
 Weeks 1 - 5 • Use contextual decoding skills when “reading”
 • Observe a sequence of instructions and respond Paired/Independent visual reading
 appropriately • “Read” with a partner
 • Observe stories and predict the ending, or make up • “Read” own and others’ recordings
 their own ending for the story
 • “Read” independently: a variety of signed texts
 • Sign simple stories varying signing mode (short fiction and poems)
 Weeks 6 - 10
 • “Listen for” the detail in stories and answer open-
 ended questions, e.g. work out cause and effect
 • Role play different situations, e.g. take on the role of
 a Deaf TV presenter
 • Use appropriate language with different people such
 as when interviewing friends vs adults
 • Sign jokes using language imaginatively

 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 • Observe stories and predict the ending, or make up • Identify some synonyms and antonyms • Draft, record and ‘publish’ own story • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 their own ending for the story • Read” independently: a variety of signed texts • Record and discuss own recording with a partner Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: (short fiction and poems) Formal Assessment Activity 2: • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 • Role play different situations, e.g. take on the role of Formal Assessment Activity 2: • Record 1-2 chunks on personal experiences or texts
 a Deaf TV presenter

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 • Interpret information from simple tables such as events
 • Use appropriate language with different people such calendar
 as when interviewing friends vs adults

 38
 GRADE 2 TERM 4

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Phonological Awareness

 39
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of SASL and other Daily Visual Reading Activities Shared, Group and Independent Recording • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes
 subjects Shared Visual Reading • Participate in a discussion and contribute ideas • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
 • Observe without interrupting, ask questions for • “Read” a variety of signed texts (fiction and non- • Experiment with signs: present a simple poem • Understand and group different signs which have
 clarification and comment on what was observed fiction DVDs) as a whole class with teacher • Record at least two chunks on personal experiences the same parameter
 • Sign about personal experiences and more general • Answer higher order questions based on the text or events e.g. a family celebration
 news, e.g. tell news using descriptive language • Understand and group common signs into
 “read” • Draft, record and ‘publish’ own story of at least two parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same
 • Understand and use appropriate language for • Express whether a story was liked and justify the chunks, using appropriate beginning and ending handshape or signs made in the same location)
 different subjects response • Organize information in a chart or table • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 • Suggest solutions to a problem especially during • Express a personal response to media images
 Mathematics (e.g. story sums) • Use informational structures when recording e.g. • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 such as newspaper and magazine pictures, when recording recipes texts
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and posters, advertisements
 appropriately • Sequence signed text by using signs like FIRST, • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling NEXT and FINALLY
 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing Group Guided Visual Reading
 activities • Use correct SASL grammar so that others can
 • The whole group ”reads” the same signed text understand what has been recorded
 Weeks 1 - 5
 • Use contextual decoding skills to make meaning • Use fingerspelling where needed
 • Observe a complex sequence of instructions and
 respond appropriately • Use self-correcting strategies when “reading”: “re- • Indicate time/ tense correctly
 reading”, pausing
 • Participate in discussions: suggest topics for
 discussion, ask questions for information and report Paired/Independent visual reading:
 back on the group’s work • “Read” own and others’ recordings
 • Participate in playing sign games, e.g. guessing • “Read” with a partner”
 games
 • “Read” independently at a more complex level for
 • Sign jokes using appropriate signing mode enjoyment or information from a variety of available
 Weeks 6 - 10 signed texts: simple fiction and non-fiction
 • “Listen for” the detail in stories and answer higher-
 order questions
 • Answer open-ended questions and justify answers
 • Express feelings about a signed text and give reasons

 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1 Formal Assessment Activity 1
 • Observe without interrupting, ask questions for • Express a personal response to media images • Experiment with signs: present a simple poem • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 clarification and comment on what was observed such as newspaper and magazine pictures,
 • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 posters, advertisements
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: texts

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Use informational structures when recording e.g.
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: Formal Assessment Activity 2: when recording recipes Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 • “Listen for” the detail in stories and answer higher- • “Read” independently at a more complex level for • Sequence signed text by using signs like FIRST,
 enjoyment or information from a variety of available • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 order questions NEXT and FINALLY
 signed texts: simple fiction and non-fiction
 • Answer open-ended questions and justify answers
 • Express feelings about a signed text and give reasons
 Grade 3
 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Phonological Awareness
 TERM 1

CAPS
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of SASL and other Shared Visual Reading Shared, Group and Independent Recording • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes
 subjects • Use visual cues to “talk about” a graphical text, e.g. • Draw pictures and record sentences to show • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
 • Sign about personal experiences, e.g. sign news look at the photograph and discuss for example understanding of a story
 • Understand and group different signs which have
 expressing feelings and opinions what it is about and where it was taken • Record instructions, e.g. to a friend the same parameter
 • Observe without interrupting, showing respect for the • “Read” a variety of signed texts as a whole class • Contribute ideas, signs and sentences for a class
 signer and taking turns to sign • Understand and group common signs into
 with the teacher story (Shared Recording) parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same
 • Use appropriate language when signing to friends and • “Read” a DVD as a whole class with the teacher and • Use a picture to choose a topic to record about handshape or signs made in the same location)
 adults, e.g. “telling” the teacher how the ball came to describe the main idea and the main characters
 break the window and then “telling” friends about the • Discuss with a partner to begin planning for • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 • “Read” different poems around a topic and discuss recording
 same incident both the form and meanings • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and • Ask questions to help define the recording task texts
 • Answer higher order questions before, during and
 appropriately after “reading” a shared signed text, • Record at least one chunk e.g. own news, creative • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing story, description of an incident/experiment
 • Understand role-shift in signed stories • Understand that changing one of the parameters of
 activities • Record with illustrations sentences on a topic to a sign can change the meaning of the sign or forms
 • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling contribute to a signed text for the class library
 Weeks 1 - 5 another sign
 Group Guided Visual Reading: • Record different sentence types using appropriate
 • Observe a complex sequence of instructions (at least • Form different signs by changing the parameters
 4) and respond appropriately • The whole group “reads” the same story on the SASL grammar (e.g. handshapes and placement)
 instructional reading level of the group • Use fingerspelling where appropriate
 • “Listen for” the main idea and for detail in stories and
 answer higher-order questions, e.g. discuss what the • Use self-correcting strategies when “reading”: “re- • Indicate time/tense correctly
 best title would be and why reading”, pausing
 • Ask questions for clarification and comment on what • Show an understanding of SASL conventions
 was observed Paired/Independent Visual Reading
 • Express feelings about a signed text and give reasons • “Read” a variety of signed texts independently
 Weeks 6 - 10
 • Participate in discussions, asking questions and
 showing sensitivity to the feelings of others
 • Answer questions and give reasons for the answers
 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 • Sign about personal experiences, e.g. sign news Shared Visual Reading • Use a picture to choose a topic to record about • Understand and group common signs into
 expressing feelings and opinions • Use visual cues to “talk about” a graphical text, e.g. parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same
 • Discuss with a partner to begin planning for handshape or signs made in the same location)
 • Observe a complex sequence of instructions (at least look at the photograph and discuss for example recording
 4) and respond appropriately what it is about and where it was taken • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 • Ask questions to help define the recording task
 • “Listen for” the main idea and for detail in stories and • “Read” a DVD as a whole class with the teacher and • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 answer higher-order questions, e.g. discuss what the describe the main idea and the main characters • Record at least one chunk e.g. own news, creative
 texts
 best title would be and why story, description of an incident/experiment
 • “Read” different poems around a topic and discuss • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 both the form and meanings
 • Understand that changing one of the parameters of
 • Answer higher order questions before, during and a sign can change the meaning of the sign or forms
 after “reading” a shared signed text,
 another sign
 • Understand role-shift in signed stories

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 • Form different signs by changing the parameters
 Paired/Independent Visual Reading (e.g. handshapes and placement)
 • “Read” a variety of signed texts independently

 40
 GRADE 3 TERM 2
 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Phonological Awareness

 41
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and Shared Visual Reading Shared, Group and Independent Recording • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes
 other subjects • “Read” a variety of signed texts as a whole class • Participate in a discussion to choose a topic to • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
 • Observe and respond to signed announcements and with the teacher record about • Understand and group different signs which have the
 instructions • Use visual cues to identify the purpose of • Record at least two chunks on personal experiences same parameter
 • Sign about personal experiences e.g. sign news advertisements and the intended audience e.g. daily news or a school event • Understand and group common signs into parameter
 expressing feelings and opinions • “Read” signed texts as a whole class with the • Record own story or a familiar story or another families (e.g. signs made using the same handshape
 • Observe stories, express feelings about the stories teacher and discuss the sequence of events, setting creative text of at least ten sentences or signs made in the same location)
 and give reasons and cause-effect relations • Keep a signed diary for one week, noting the • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 • Predict what will happen in a story • Use the information from a graphical text, e.g. follow weather and one other piece of information • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 • Work out cause and effect in a story using connecting the directions on a map and take part in a walk • Record a review of a simple signed text texts
 signs such as ‘WHY?’ around the school
 • Record with illustrations a story to contribute to a • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 • Use language to investigate and explore, such as • Find and use sources of information such as Deaf signed text for the class library
 community members, DVD library texts • Understand that changing one of the parameters of
 suggesting an alternative, e.g. using conditionals ‘IF’ • Uses correct SASL grammar so that others can a sign can change the meaning of the sign or forms
 • Ask questions to clarify, plan and get information on an • Answer a range of higher order questions based on understand what has been recorded another sign
 activity the signed text “read”
 • Identify and use nouns, adjectives, verbs and • Form different signs by changing the parameters
 • Analyse, compare and contrast information such as • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling adverbs correctly (e.g. handshapes and placement)
 the eating habits of a child and a dog Group Guided Visual Reading • Use fingerspelling where needed • Link handshapes to specific meanings (e.g. person
 • Understand and use appropriate language for different • The whole group views the same signed story at the • Indicate time/tense correctly classifiers)
 subjects such as Life Skills instructional level of the group • Understand that certain signs come from specific
 • View and edit own recording
 • Suggest solutions to a problem, specifically story sums • Use contextual decoding skills when “reading” locations (e.g. signs to do with thinking and intellect
 in Mathematics unfamiliar signs • Show (‘publish’) own recording to a friend or a group are made on the forehead and signs to do with
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and • Use self-correcting strategies when “reading”: “re- emotions are made on the chest)
 appropriately reading”, pausing • Segment simple one handed and two handed (same
 Twice weekly focussed Observing and Signing • Use diagrams and illustrations in signed text to handshape) signs into parameters
 activities increase understanding
 Weeks 1 - 3 Paired/Independent Visual Reading
 • Observe more complex instructions (at least 5) and • “Read” with a partner
 responds appropriately • “Read” own and others’ recordings
 • Make a presentation, e.g. “show and tell” - describes • “Read” independently signed texts used in Shared
 and compares an object Visual Reading sessions, simple signed stories
 Weeks 4 - 6 and signed texts from the visual reading corner as
 • Observe stories signed by the teacher for a longer well as any other signed texts at the independent
 period with interest “reading” level of the learners
 • Sign a short story with a simple plot and different
 characters
 Weeks 7 - 10

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Participate in group and class discussions, suggest
 topics and contribute ideas
 • Sign about a general news event, expressing feelings
 and opinions
 • Observe and share jokes
 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 • Observe more complex instructions (at least 5) and Shared Visual Reading: • Record own story or a familiar story or another • Understand and group common signs into parameter
 responds appropriately • “Read” signed texts as a whole class with the creative text of at least ten sentences families (e.g. signs made using the same handshape
 • Make a presentation, including appropriate teacher and discuss the sequence of events, setting Formal Assessment Activity 2: or signs made in the same location)

CAPS
 fingerspelling, e.g. “show and tell” - describes and and cause-effect relations • Keep a signed diary for one week, noting the • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 compares an object • Find and use sources of information such as Deaf weather and one other piece of information • Understand that changing one of the parameters of
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: community members, DVD library texts Formal Assessment Activity 3: a sign can change the meaning of the sign or forms
 • Observe stories signed by the teacher for a longer • Answer a range of higher order questions based on another sign
 • Record with illustrations a story to contribute to a
 period with interest the signed text “read” signed text for the class library Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 • Sign a short story with a simple plot and different Formal Assessment Activity 2: • Uses correct SASL grammar so that others can • Form different signs by changing the parameters
 characters Shared Visual Reading: understand what has been recorded (e.g. handshapes and placement)
 Formal Assessment Activity 3: • Use the information from a graphical text, e.g. follow • Understand that certain signs come from specific
 • Participate in group and class discussions, suggest the directions on a map and take part in a walk locations (e.g. signs to do with thinking and intellect
 topics and contribute ideas around the school are made on the forehead and signs to do with
 emotions are made on the chest)
 • Observe stories, express feelings about the stories Group Guided Visual Reading:
 and give reasons • Segment simple one handed and two handed (same
 • Use diagrams and illustrations in signed text to handshape) signs into parameters
 • With support, predict what will happen in a story increase understanding
 Formal Assessment Activity 3:
 • Work out cause and effect in a story using connecting Formal Assessment Activity 3:
 signs such as ‘WHY?’ • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 Paired/Independent Visual Reading: texts
 • “Read” independently signed texts used in Shared • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 Visual Reading sessions, simple signed stories
 and signed texts from the visual reading corner as • Link handshapes to specific meanings (e.g. person
 well as any other signed texts at the independent classifiers)
 “reading” level of the learners

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 42
 GRADE 3 TERM 3
 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Phonological Awareness

 43
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and Shared Visual Reading Shared, Group and Independent Recording • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes
 other subjects Introduce different genres such as drama and • Record personal signed texts in different forms: a • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
 • Make a signed presentation: “tell” news or sign about different types of poems. diary entry, a message to a relative, a description • Understand and group different signs which have
 an experience logically and in sequence • “Read” a variety of signed texts as a whole class • Draft, record, edit and ‘publish’ own story of at least the same parameter
 • Use an increasing vocabulary when signing with teacher two chunks, with a title • Understand and group common signs into
 • Suggests solutions to a problem, specifically story • “Read” a range of different types of poems around • Record with illustrations sentences on a topic to parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same
 sums in Mathematics a topic and discuss these (e.g. both form and contribute to a signed text for the class library handshape or signs made in the same location)
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and meanings, sign selection) • Summarise and record information using visual • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 appropriately • Interpret information from graphical texts such as images • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 Twice weekly focussed observing and signing activities advertisements, pictures, graphs, charts • Use different sentence types when recording, e.g. texts
 Weeks 1 - 3 • “Read” signed texts as a whole class with teacher statements, questions, commands • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 and discuss main idea, characters and plot • Use SASL grammar correctly
 • Interview people for a particular purpose such as to • Understand that changing one of the parameters of
 find out about a person’s work • Express whether a story was liked and justify answer • Identify and use nouns, referencing, adjectives, a sign can change the meaning of the sign or forms
 • Observe a story and work out cause and effect in the • Answer a range of higher order questions based on verbs, adverbs and placement (prepositions) another sign
 story the signed text “read” correctly • Form different signs by changing the parameters
 Weeks 4 - 6 • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling • Join sentences using conjunctions such as AND, (e.g. handshapes and placement)
 Group Guided Visual Reading BUT • Link handshapes to specific meanings (e.g. person
 • Participate in discussions, giving useful feedback to
 others • The whole group “reads” the same signed story at • Use a variety of vocabulary to make the recording classifiers )
 the instructional level of the group more interesting • Understand that certain signs come from specific
 • Put events in order of logical sequence
 • “Read” different genres such as dramas • Show (‘publish’) own recording to class locations (e.g. signs to do with thinking and intellect
 Weeks 7 - 10 are made on the forehead and signs to do with
 • “Listen for” the detail in stories and other signed texts • Use a range of self-correcting methods when emotions are made on the chest)
 and answer open-ended questions, e.g. YOU GROW “reading”: “re-reading”, “reading” further on, pausing
 • Segment simple one handed and two handed (same
 UP DO WHAT? • Use contextual decoding skills when “reading” handshape) signs into parameters
 • Sign a story with a beginning, middle and end unfamiliar signs
 • Segment one handed and two handed (different
 Paired/Independent Visual Reading handshape) signs into parameters
 • “Read” with a partner • Recognise that in some two-handed signs there is a
 • “Read” own and others’ recordings dominant and a passive hand, e.g. HELP, STAND
 • “Read” independently signed texts used in Shared
 Visual Reading sessions, signed stories and other
 signed texts from the visual reading corner at the
 independent “reading” level of the learners
 • Find information independently or in pairs from level-
 appropriate non-fiction signed texts

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1:
 • Interview people for a particular purpose such as to Shared Visual Reading: • Draft, record, edit and ‘publish’ own story of at least • Understand and group common signs into
 find out about a person’s work • “Read” signed texts as a whole class with teacher two chunks, with a title parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same
 handshape or signs made in the same location)

CAPS
 • Observe a story and work out cause and effect in the and discuss main idea, characters and plot Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 story Group Guided Visual Reading: • Record with illustrations sentences on a topic to • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: • “Read” different genres such as dramas contribute to a signed text for the class library • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 • Participate in discussions, giving useful feedback to Formal Assessment Activity 3: texts
 Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 others • Summarise and record information using visual • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 Shared Visual Reading:
 • Put events in order of logical sequence images Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 • “Read” signed texts as a whole class with teacher
 Formal Assessment Activity 3: and discuss main idea, characters and plot • Understand that changing one of the parameters of
 • “Listen for” the detail in stories and other signed texts a sign can change the meaning of the sign or forms
 • Express whether a story was liked and justify answer another sign
 and answer open-ended questions, e.g. YOU GROW
 UP DO WHAT? • Answer a range of higher order questions based on • Form different signs by changing the parameters
 the signed text “read” (e.g. handshapes and placement)
 • Sign a story with a beginning, middle and end
 Paired/Independent Visual Reading: • Link handshapes to specific meanings (e.g. person
 • Make a signed presentation: “tell” news or sign
 about an experience logically and in sequence using • “Read” independently signed texts used in Shared classifiers
 appropriate fingerspelling Visual Reading sessions, signed stories and other • Understand that certain signs come from specific
 signed texts from the visual reading corner at the locations (e.g. signs to do with thinking and intellect
 independent “reading” level of the learners are made on the forehead and signs to do with
 Formal Assessment Activity 3: emotions are made on the chest)
 Group Guided Visual Reading: Formal Assessment Activity 3:
 • Use a range of self-correcting methods when • Segment simple one handed and two handed (same
 “reading”: “re-reading”, “reading” further on, pausing handshape) signs into parameters
 • Use contextual decoding skills when “reading” • Segment one handed and two handed (different
 unfamiliar signs handshape) signs into parameters
 Paired/Independent Visual Reading: • Recognise that in some two-handed signs there is a
 • Find information independently or in pairs from level- dominant and a passive hand, e.g. HELP, STAND
 appropriate non-fiction signed texts

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 44
 GRADE 3 TERM 4

 Observing and Signing Visual Reading and Viewing Recording Phonological Awareness

 45
 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and Shared Visual Reading Shared, Group and Independent Recording: • Recognise simple commonly used handshapes
 other subjects Include fiction, non-fiction, signed news items, Provide frames to assist children to write a dialogue • Recognise that signs are made up of parameters
 • Understand and use appropriate language for signed dialogues and graphical texts. and a newspaper article.
 • Understand and group different signs which have
 different subjects • “Read” a variety of signed texts such as fiction and • Use pre-recording strategies to gather information the same parameter
 • Observe and use fingerspelling accurately and non-fiction, news items, dialogues and electronic and plan the recording: discussion with a partner,
 texts as a whole class with the teacher create a mind map, a planning frame • Understand and group common signs into
 appropriately
 parameter families (e.g. signs made using the same
 Twice weekly focussed observing and signing • “Read” signed texts as a whole class with the • Record a selection of short signed texts for different handshape or signs made in the same location)
 activities teacher and discuss characters, the ‘problem’ in purposes e.g. narratives, dialogues
 the story, the plot and the values in the text • Distinguish between different parameters of signs
 Weeks 1 - 5 • Record about personal experiences in different
 • Use visual cues to “read” graphical texts and start forms e.g. a short news item • Recognise some rhyming signs in simple signed
 • Engage in conversation as a social skill, accepting
 to analyse text for attitudes and assumptions texts
 and respecting the way others sign • Draft, record, edit and ‘publish’ own story of at least
 • Answer a range of higher order questions based on two chunks • Recognise parameters in different signed texts
 • Use language imaginatively: sign jokes using
 appropriate signing mode the text “read” • Use organisational structures when recording • Understand that changing one of the parameters of
 • “Listen for” the detail in stories and answer open- • Recognise familiar, age-appropriate fingerspelling informational texts e.g. experiments, recipes a sign can change the meaning of the sign or forms
 ended questions Group Guided Visual Reading • Sequence information and organise text in a another sign
 • Sign a story using descriptive language • The whole group “reads” the same story at the coherent and cohesive way (can include use of • Form different signs by changing the parameters
 instructional level of the group space) (e.g. handshapes and placement)
 Weeks 6 - 10
 • Use contextual decoding skills to make meaning • Use SASL grammar correctly • Link handshapes to specific meanings (e.g. person
 • Observe a story and work out cause and effect in
 • Use conjunctions to form compound sentences classifiers
 response to questions • Use self-correcting strategies when “reading”: “re-
 reading”, “reading” further on, pausing • Use fingerspelling where needed • Understand that certain signs come from specific
 • Plan and make a signed presentation: sign personal
 news, describe something experienced, narrate an Paired/Independent Visual Reading locations (e.g. signs to do with thinking and intellect
 • Discuss own and others’ recordings to get and give
 event using a visual aid feedback are made on the forehead and signs to do with
 • “Read” own and others’ recordings emotions are made on the chest)
 • Express feelings and opinions about a signed text • “Read” with a partner • Record own signed texts and contribute to class
 and give reasons DVD collection • Segment simple one handed and two handed
 • “Read” independently at a more complex level for (same handshape) signs into parameters
 • Discuss solutions to a problem using higher order enjoyment or information from a variety of available
 thinking skills • Segment one handed and two handed (different
 signed texts: simple fiction and non-fiction and texts
 handshape) signs into parameters
 from different cultures, and signed texts used in
 Shared Visual Reading sessions • Recognise that in some two-handed signs there is a
 dominant and a passive hand, e.g. help, stand
 • Identify all the possible handshapes that the non-
 dominant hand can take

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT ASSESSMENT
 Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity 1: Formal Assessment Activity1:
 • Sign a story using descriptive language Shared Visual Reading: • Use pre-recording strategies to gather information • Understand that changing one of the parameters of
 • “Listen for” the detail in stories and answer open- • “Read” signed texts as a whole class with the and plan the recording: discussion with a partner, a sign can change the meaning of the sign or forms

CAPS
 ended questions teacher and discuss characters, the ‘problem’ in create a mind map, a planning frame another sign
 the story, the plot and the values in the text • Use organisational structures when recording • Form different signs by changing the parameters
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: • Answer a range of higher order questions based on informational texts e.g. experiments, recipes (e.g. handshapes and placement)
 the text “read” • Sequence information and organise text in a • Link handshapes to specific meanings (e.g. person
 • Use language imaginatively: sign jokes using
 appropriate signing mode coherent and cohesive way (can include use of classifiers
 Formal Assessment Activity 2: space) • Understand that certain signs come from specific
 • Plan and make a signed presentation including
 appropriate fingerspelling: sign personal news, Paired/Independent Visual Reading: locations (e.g. signs to do with thinking and intellect
 describe something experienced, narrate an event are made on the forehead and signs to do with
 • “Read” own and others’ recordings Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 using a visual aid emotions are made on the chest)
 • “Read” independently at a more complex level for • Discuss own and others’ recordings to get and give
 Formal Assessment Activity 2:
 enjoyment or information from a variety of available feedback
 signed texts: simple fiction and non-fiction and • Segment simple one handed and two handed
 • Record own signed texts and contribute to class
 texts from different cultures, and signed texts used (same handshape) signs into parameters
 DVD collection
 in Shared Visual Reading sessions • Segment one handed and two handed (different
 handshape) signs into parameters
 • Recognise that in some two-handed signs there is a
 dominant and a passive hand, e.g. help, stand
 • Identify all the possible handshapes that the non-
 dominant hand can take

SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3
 46
 GLOSSARY
adjectives – adjectives can express some feature or quality of a noun; they can come before or after the noun or be
incorporated into the noun; they are often formed by non-manual modification (see non-manual modification)

adverbs – adverbs are used to add in information about an event or situation such as its time, manner, frequency or
place; they are often formed by non-manual modification (see non-manual modification)

alliteration - repetition of parameters

ambiguity - possible double or even multiple meanings of certain signs and expressions; open to two or more
interpretations; or often intended to mislead; vague and unclear or not giving a straight answer

analogy - finding similarities in things that are usually seen as different, a way of explaining or illustrating something,
but not a proof

anticlimax – when an expectation of some high point of importance or excitement is not fulfilled or the seriousness
of a literary plot is suddenly lost as a result of a comical, digressive or meaningless event

attention getting strategies – appropriate way of attracting the attention of and Deaf person, e.g. tapping on the
shoulder, switch lights on and off

audience - the intended viewers of a particular text

author – the signer who produces a recorded text; often referred to as author/signer in this document

bias – a tendency to favour one thing, idea, attitude or person over another which makes it difficult to make a fair
assessment

body language – non-verbal communication consisting of body posture, gestures, facial expressions and eye
movement

chunking (paragraphing) - way of dividing up signed text

classifier – productive morpheme that represents the visual appearance, placement, movement and/or handling
or objects and animate beings; classifiers do not occur in isolation but must be used with a noun referent; can be
inflected to show pluralisation, position and verb movement

climax – the most exciting, effective or important part of the story; this important part is not necessarily at the end

coherence – the underlying logical relationship which links ideas together and gives a chunk unity

cohesion – the linking of sentences or chunks by means of logical connectors such as conjunctions, pronouns or
repetition

collocation – the way that signs tend to group together, e.g. TEA, DRINK, CUP

colloquialism (see also slang) – language belonging to ordinary or familiar conversation but not used in formal
language, often including slang; this may include vocabulary and expressions acceptable among friends, colleagues
or in a close working group; colloquialisms may be inappropriate in formal communications but are appropriate in
some settings and can help to build rapport

compound signs - Compounds are a combination of 2 free morphemes that make a new sign with a different but
related meaning, e.g. PARENTS is a compound of the 2 free morphemes MOTHER and FATHER

conditional - Expresses ‘IF’ – ‘then’ relationships between 2 sentences, e.g RAIN (NMF )THERE, UMBRELLA
NONE, YOU WET

 47 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 connotation / connotative meaning (see also denotative meaning) - both the positive and negative associations
that a word collects through usage that go beyond the literal (primary) meaning

constructed action – a discourse strategy used widely in sign languages in which the signer uses various parts of
their body – such as the head, torso, hands, eye-gaze and other non-manual cues – to depict the actions, utterances,
thought, feelings and/or attitudes of the character; also known as roleshift

context – a text is always used and produced in a context; the context includes the broad and the immediate situation
including aspects such as the social, cultural and political background, the term can also refer to that which precedes
or follows a sign or text and is essential to its meaning

contextual clues – meaning given in the context

denotation / denotative meaning (see also connotative meaning) – the literal or primary meaning of a sign

dialect or regional variation – a variation of a language which includes different vocabulary and expressions; dialect
usually refers to signing characteristic of a particular region but can also be used more broadly to refer to other types
of variants in signing

discourse – longer pieces of text beyond the sentence level

eye gaze – using eyes to index the referent

facial expression – it is the overall configuration of the facial features, including the brows, eye-aperture, nose,
cheeks and mouth

figures of speech/figurative language - signs used in a non-literal way to create a desired effect; literary texts often
make concentrated use of figurative language (e.g. simile, personification, metaphor)

fingerspelling – manual representation of the alphabet of a written language; one-to one relationship between the
letters of the spoken language and the handshape

genre - the types or categories into which signed texts are grouped, e.g. longer stories, drama, poetry

gesture – movement of the hands, face or body which communicates specific messages (e.g. nodding of head to
indicate agreement)

glossing – a way of representing signs and non-manual features in printed words

handshape – this is the parameter that refers to the shape of the hands in its onset; form adopted by the hand
depending on the position of the fingers

higher order questions – these are questions that go beyond basic skills and require critical thinking including
analysis, synthesis and evaluation

iconicity – iconic signs look like the objects they represent; some aspects of the object or action is copied in the sign,
which makes the meaning transparent; visual equivalent of onomatopoeia

indexing – pointing to someone, something or to a particular location with the index finger (referent – people, objects,
events which are initially located in the signing space and thereafter referred to by pointing)

imperative form – a command, warning or advice

infer and deduce – to pick up meaning behind what is stated and to deduce all the implications; to use the information
in the signed text to work out something that is not directly stated in the signed text

jargon – special terms or expressions used in a trade or profession or by any specific group, e.g. computer or
medical terminology

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 48
 loan signs – signs borrowed from other sign languages as opposed to the indigenous/ native signs

location – this is the parameter that refers to where the sign is articulated, either on the body or the signing space

metaphor – using one thing to describe another thing which has similar qualities (e.g. ‘Education is the key to
success’)

mode – a method, a way or manner in which something is presented; a way of communicating (e.g. the signing
mode, and the visual mode (which includes graphic forms such as charts); information can be changed from one
mode to another (e.g. converting a graph into a chunk)

mood – atmosphere or emotion in signed texts; it shows the feeling or the frame of mind of the characters; also refers to
the atmosphere produced by visual or multi-media text

movement – this is the parameter that the direction, speed, repetition and manner are important in conveying the
meaning in signing

narrative – a signed account of connected events in order of occurrence, a story

non-manual features – these actions are produced by any part of the body, from the waist up, other than the hands;
carry grammatical meaning using movements of the eyes, eyebrows, head, or shoulders and various kinds of facial
expressions and of lip, cheek, and tongue movement; no English equivalent

non-manual modification - non-manual modifiers consist of the various facial expressions, head tilting, shoulder
raising, mouthing, and similar NMFs that are added to hand signs to create meaning, and are often necessary to
properly form words. Non-manual modifiers are typically adjectival or adverbial. For example, the adverb “th,” the
tongue being placed between the teeth, means “carelessly” or “lazily” when combined with a verb

non-mirroring – when you are signing you use your perspective (non-mirroring); if you are facing a Deaf person
and giving them directions and you ask them to turn right you will sign to your right - the Deaf person facing you will
understand that you are signing from your perspective which is the opposite of theirs

notation system – a number of different systems developed for representing sign languages in written form, e.g.
Stokoe notation, HamNoSys (Hamburg notation system), SignWriting

numeral incorporation – incorporating the hand configurations found in numeral signs into numeral incorporating
signs, e.g. ONE WEEK, TWO WEEKS, THREE WEEKS

open-ended questions – it cannot be answered with a simple yes or no or a specific piece of information and it
gives the person answering the question scope to give the information that seems to them to be appropriate; this is
opposed to a closed-ended question which is a question format that limits respondents with a list of answer choices
from which they must choose, e.g. multiple choice, yes/no and forced alternate questions

orientation – this is the parameter that describes the direction of the palm and/or fingertips during the production of
the sign

paraphrase – a restatement of an idea or text in one’s own signs

parameters – these are the five characteristics or basic parts of a sign, namely handshape, location, palm orientation,
movement, non-manual features

personification – attributing human characteristics to non-human things

phonological awareness – children’s awareness of the phonological structure of sign language i.e. parameters;
phonemes are the smallest building blocks of a language; sounds in spoken language vs parameters in sign language

proform – refers to classifiers and indicates any form that stands in the place of, and does the job of, another form/
whole entity, e.g. people, animals and objects

 49 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 pronoun - a form that stands in the place of, and does the job of, a noun. Pronouns include personal
pronouns such as `I` and `you` and possessive pronouns such as `my` and `your`

register - the use of different signs, style, grammar, signing mode for different contexts, situations,
relationships and familiarity between language users

rhetorical question – this is not a request for information or an answer; the signer answers the question
in the next sentence; a rhetorical question serves the purpose of backgrounding certain information (in
the rhetorical question) and highlighting other information (in the focused phrase), all of which is done for
conveying information in a conversation

roleshift – signers take on the role of two or more characters, with the direction of the body and eye-gaze
allowing not only a shift in roles but also a shift in who is being addressed (also see constructed action)

SASL conventions – norms appropriate to SASL discourse dependent on the genre and context; accepted
practices or rules in the use of SASL

semantics – meaning of signs

signing mode - it is the equivalent to tone in spoken language; the emotion of the signer as conveyed by
pace of utterance, size of signing and NMF; in the context of this qualification also means announcement,
articulation, choice of signs, explanation, statement, turn of phrase, presenting

sign size – appropriate for the audience, context and genre, e.g. large signing would apply to younger
children, large audiences and large venues

SignWriting – a writing system which uses visual symbols to represent the handshapes, movements and
facial expressions of signed languages; an example of a notation system (see also notation system)

slang – informal language often used by a group of people, such as teenagers; the difference between
colloquial language and slang is that slang has not yet been accepted in polite or formal conversation,
whereas colloquialisms have been accepted

stereotype – a fixed conventional view of about what role a particular person is expected to play

style – the distinct and unique manner in which a signer arranges signs to achieve particular effects;
combines the idea to be expressed with the individuality of the signer; includes individual sign choices and
signing mode

syntax– also known as grammar; major sign categories i.e. lexical and parts of speech

vlog - video diary as opposed to a blog (written page)

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 50
 Note

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 51
 Note

CAPS SASL HOME LANGUAGE FOUNDATION PHASE | Grades R - 3 52