ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE

 National Curriculum Statement (NCS)

 Curriculum Assessment
 Policy Statement

 Foundation Phase
 Grades 1 - 3
 Department of Basic Education
Private Bag X895
Pretoria 0001
(012) 354 4094
Fax (012) 323 7749
www.education.gov.za
www.thutong.doe.gov.za/InclusiveEducation

© 2016 DEPARTMENT OF BASIC EDUCATION

DRAFT COPY
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT
 FOUNDATION PHASE: GRADES 1-3

 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE

CAPS 1
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

Section 1: Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

1.1 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.2 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.3 General aims of the South African curriculum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.4 Time allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.4.1 Foundation Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.4.2 Intermediate Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.4.3 Senior Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.4.4 Grades 10-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

Section 2: Introducing the Second Additional Language in the Intermediate Phase . . . . . 10

2.1 Languages in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1.1 Language levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1.2 Aims of learning a Second Additional Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.1.3 Teaching the Second Additional Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.1.4 The Language Skills for the Second Additional Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.1.5 Types of literacies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.1.6 Language Structure and Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.1.7 Topics and Themes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.1.8 Pedagogy and Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.1.9 Classroom Management and Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

2.2 Assessment in the Second Additional Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.3 Time allocation and Time Tabling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.4 Promotion and Progression: Grades 1 - 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.5 Recording and Reporting: Grades 1-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.6 Learning and Teaching Support Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

 2 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

SECTION 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

3.1 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS AND TEACHING PLANS . . . . . . . . . . . 26

3.2 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE SECOND
 ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE (SAL) GRADES 1-3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

3.3 REQUIREMENTS GRADE 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.3.1 GRADE 1 TERM 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.3.2 GRADE 1 TERM 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.3.3 GRADE 1 TERM 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.3.4 GRADE 1 TERM 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

3.4 REQUIREMENTS GRADE 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.4.1 GRADE 2 TERM 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.4.2 GRADE 2 TERM 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.4.3 GRADE 2 TERM 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
3.4.4 GRADE 2 TERM 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52

3.5 REQUIREMENTS GRADE 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
3.5.1 GRADE 3 TERM 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
3.5.2 GRADE 3 TERM 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
3.5.3 GRADE 3 TERM 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
3.5.4 GRADE 3 TERM 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

GLOSSARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69

CAPS 3
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 SECTION 1: CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT

 1.1 BACKGROUND

 The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in
 the schooling sector.

 To improve its implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments
 coming into effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was
 developed for each subject to replace the old Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and
 Subject Assessment Guidelines in Grades R - 12. The amended National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 12:
 Curriculum and Assessment Policy (January 2012) replaces the National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 9
 (2002) and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10 - 12 (2004).

 1.2 OVERVIEW

 (a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for
 learning and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:
 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy documents for each approved school subject as listed in
 the policy document National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF); and
 (ii) The policy document National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF).
 (b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12 (January 2012) should be read in conjunction with
 the following documents:
 (i) An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4
 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol for
 Assessment Grade R – 12, published in the Government Gazette, No. 29467 of 11 December
 2006; and
 (ii) An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4
 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special needs,
 published in the Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006.

 4 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

(c) The Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines for
 Grades R - 9 and Grades 10 - 12 are repealed and replaced by the Curriculum and Assessment Policy
 documents for Grades R – 12 (January 2011).
(d) The sections on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy as contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this
 document constitute the norms and standards of the National Curriculum Statement Grades R – 12
 and therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form
 the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to determine minimum outcomes and standards, as well
 as the processes and procedures for the assessment of learner achievement to be applicable to public
 and independent schools.

1.3 GENERAL AIMS OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN CURRICULUM
 (a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 12 gives expression to what is regarded to be
 knowledge, skills and values worth learning. It will ensure that learners acquire and apply knowledge
 and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes the
 idea of grounding knowledge in local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

 (b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 12 serves the purposes of:
  equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability
 or intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment, and
 meaningful participation in society as citizens of a free country;
  providing access to higher education;
  facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and
  providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

 (c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 12 is based on the following principles:
  social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that
 equal educational opportunities are provided for all sections of our population;
  active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than
 rote and uncritical learning of given truths;
  high knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at
 each grade are specified and sets high, achievable standards in all subjects;
  progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

CAPS 5
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices of
 social and environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of
 South Africa. The National Curriculum Statement Grades 10 – 12 (General) is sensitive to issues
 of diversity such as poverty, inequality, race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;
  valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country
 as important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and
  credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and
 depth to those of other countries.

 (d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R - 12 aims to produce learners that are able to:
  identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;
  work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;
  organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;
  collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;
  communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;
  use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the
 environment and the health of others; and
  demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that
 problem solving contexts do not exist in isolation.

 (e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This
 can only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers
 to learning, and how to plan for diversity.

 6 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

1.4 TIME ALLOCATION

 1.4.1 Foundation Phase

 (a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT GRADE R GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3
 Home Language 10 8/7 8/7 8/7
 First Additional Language N/A 3/2 3/2 3/4
 Second Additional Language N/A 1 1 1

 Mathematics 7 7 7 7
 Life Skills 6 6 6 7
  Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (1) (2)
  Creative Arts (2) (2) (2) (2)
  Physical Education (2) (2) (2) (2)

  Personal and Social (1) (1) (1) (1)

 Wellbeing
 TOTAL HOURS 23 24 24 26

 (b) Instructional time for Grades R is 23 hours. Instructional time for Grades 1-2 is 24 hours; and Grade 3 is
 allocated 26 hours.

 (c) Home Language in Grade R is allocated 10 hours. A maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are
 allocated for Home Language for Grades 1-3. The First Additional Language for Grades 1-2 is allocated
 maximum of 3 hours and a minimum of 2 hours; and Grade 3 has a maximum of 4 and a minimum of 3
 hours. The Second Additional Language for is allocated 1 hour for Grades 1-3.

 (d) Mathematics for Grades R-3 is allocated 7 hours. Life Skills for Grades R-2 is allocated 6 hours; and
 Grade 3 is allocated 7 hours.

CAPS 7
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase
 (a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:
 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Second Additional Language 2
 Mathematics 6
 Natural Sciences and Technology 3.5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4
  Creative Arts (1.5)
  Physical Education (1)
  Personal and Social Well-being (1.5)

 TOTAL 29.5

 1.4.3 Senior Phase
 a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:
 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 5
 First Additional Language 4
 Second Additional Language 2
 Mathematics 4.5
 Natural Sciences 3
 Social Sciences 3
 Technology 2
 Economic Management Sciences 2
 Life Orientation 2
 Creative Arts 2
 TOTAL 29.5

 8 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 1.4.4 Grades 10-12
 (a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:
 SUBJECT Time allocation per week (hours)
 Home Language 4.5
 First Additional Language 4.5
 Second Additional Language 2
 Mathematics 4.5
 Life Orientation 2
 A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group B 12 (3x4h)
 Annexure B, Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National
 policy pertaining to the programme and promotion
 requirements of the National Curriculum Statement Grades
 R-12, subject to the provisos stipulated in paragraph 28 of
 the said policy document.
 TOTAL 29.5

 The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified above,
 and may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish to
 offer additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

CAPS 9
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 SECTION 2: INTRODUCING THE SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE IN THE FOUNDATION
 PHASE

 2.1 LANGUAGES IN THE NATIONAL CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT

 Language is a tool for thought and communication. It is also a cultural and aesthetic means commonly shared
 among a people to make better sense of the world they live in. Learning to use language effectively enables
 learners to acquire knowledge, to express their identity, feelings and ideas, to interact with others, and to
 manage their world. It also provides learners with a rich, powerful and deeply rooted set of images and ideas
 that can be used to make their world other than it is; better and clearer than it is. It is through language that
 cultural diversity and social relations are expressed and constructed, and it is through language that such
 constructions can be altered, broadened and refined.

 2.1.1 Language levels

 Language learning in the Foundation Phase includes all the official languages in South Africa, namely,
 Afrikaans, English, isiNdebele, isiXhosa, isiZulu, Sepedi (Sesotho sa Leboa), Sesotho, Setswana, Siswati,
 Tshivenda, Xitsonga – as well as Non-official Languages. These languages can be offered at different
 language levels.

 Home Language is the first language acquired by learners. However, many South African schools do not offer
 the home languages of some or all of the enrolled learners but rather have one or two languages offered at
 Home Language level. As a result, the labels Home Language and First Additional Language refer to the
 proficiency levels at which the language is offered and not the native (Home) or acquired (as in the additional
 languages) language. For the purposes of this policy, any reference to Home Language should be understood
 to refer to the level and not the language itself.

 The Home Language level provides for language proficiency that reflects the basic interpersonal
 communication skills required in social situations and the cognitive academic skills essential for learning across
 the curriculum. Emphasis is placed on the teaching of the listening, speaking, reading and writing skills at this
 language level. This level also provides learners with a literary, aesthetic and imaginative ability that will
 provide them with the ability to recreate, imagine, and empower their understandings of the world they live in.

 10 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

The First Additional Language refers to a language which is not a mother tongue but which is used for
certain communicative functions in a society, that is, medium of learning and teaching in education. The
curriculum provides strong support for those learners who will use their first additional language as a language
of learning and teaching. By the end of Grade 9, these learners should be able to use their home language and
first additional language effectively and with confidence for a variety of purposes, including learning.

In South Africa, many children start using their additional language, English, as the Language of Learning and
Teaching (LoLT) in Grade 4. This means that they must reach a high level of competence in English by the end
of Grade 3, and they need to be able to read and write well in English.

The First Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge of the
language when they arrive at school. The focus in the first few years of school is on developing learners’ ability
to understand and speak the language – basic interpersonal communication skills. In Grades 2 and 3 learners
start to build literacy on this oral foundation. They also apply the literacy skills they have already learned in their
Home Language. In the Intermediate and Senior Phases, learners continue to strengthen their listening,
speaking, reading and writing skills. At this stage the majority of children are learning through the medium of
their First Additional Language, English, and should be getting more exposure to it. Greater emphasis is
therefore placed on using the First Additional Language for the purposes of thinking and reasoning. This
enables learners to develop their cognitive academic skills, which they need to study subjects like Science in
English. They also engage more with literary texts and begin to develop aesthetic and imaginative ability in
their Additional Language.

By the time learners enter Intermediate Phase, they should be reasonably proficient in their First Additional
Language with regard to both interpersonal and cognitive academic skills. However, the reality is that many
learners still cannot communicate well in their Additional Language at this stage. The challenge in the
Intermediate Phase, therefore, is to provide support for these learners at the same time as providing a
curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards required in further grades. These standards must be
such that learners can use their Additional Language at a high level of proficiency to prepare them for further or
higher education or the world of work.

CAPS 11
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 The Second Additional Language level assumes that learners do not necessarily have any knowledge of the
 language when they arrive at school. The focus upon exposure to Second Additional Language is on
 developing learners’ ability to understand and speak the language - basic interpersonal communication skills.
 In Grades 1 – 3 learners start to build their oral and literacy skills. They also apply the oral and literacy skills
 they have already learned in their Home and First Additional Languages.

 In Grades 4 – 6, learners will continue to strengthen their Listening and Speaking while developing their
 Reading and Writing skills in their Second Additional Language.

 By the time learners enter Grade 4 7, they should try to communicate in their Second Additional Language at
 both interpersonal and social levels. However, the reality is that many learners still cannot communicate well in
 their Additional Language at this stage. The challenge in Grades 1-3, therefore, is to provide support for these
 learners at the same time as providing a curriculum that enables learners to meet the standards required in
 further grades. These standards must be such that learners can use their additional language at a level of
 proficiency to prepare them for further or higher education or the world of work.

 2.1.2 Aims of learning a Second Additional Language

 2.1.2.1 General aims

 Promotion of multilingualism

 The South African Constitution and the Language in Education Policy promotes multilingualism. Multilingualism
 is an important tool for social cohesion, and for individual and social development. South Africa is a multilingual
 country with eleven official languages. It is important, therefore, that children learn additional languages as
 early as possible. There are also cognitive advantages. Research shows that learning additional languages
 develops mental flexibility. Additional languages are best learned when children have a strong foundation in
 their Home Language (HL). The Home language becomes the basis for the learning of additional languages in
 a multilingual context.

 When children start to learn an additional language in Grade 1 either at the First Additional Language (FAL) or
 Second Additional Language (SAL) levels, they need to build a strong oral foundation as well as being exposed
 to print in these languages. They need to hear lots of simple, spoken language which they can understand

 12 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

from the context. Listening to the teacher tell and read stories from large illustrated books (Big Books) is a
good way of doing this; it provides a meaningful context for developing vocabulary and it also supports
children’s emergent literacy development. As children’s understanding grows, they need plenty of opportunities
to listen to and speak the language in simple ways. They need opportunities to interact for real purposes, for
example, in the early stages this might take the form of responding to instructions in the target language.

It is important to keep in mind that once children can read and write in their HL, they can transfer the following
literacy knowledge and skills to reading and writing in their FAL and SAL:
  phonological awareness – the ability to segment and blend syllables and sounds
  orthographic awareness – the understanding that marks on the page represent sounds
  alphabetic awareness – the understanding that letters represent sounds and that letters combine
 to form words and sentences
  the understanding that print carries meaning and that reading is about getting meaning from print
  some concepts of print e.g. that we read from left to right
  habits and attitudes about reading and writing – if learners are confident readers and writers in
 their HL they can transfer these strategies to reading and writing in their FAL and SAL
  content knowledge – content mastered in one language transfers to another language, so if a
 theme is covered in HL it provides a foundation for literacy development in their FAL and SAL

In the case of the FAL, children should be able to read and write confidently in the target language by the end
of Grade 3, especially if they are going to use it as their LoLT in Grade 4. In the case of SAL where less time is
allocated, the main focus is on oral communication.

By reading simple books in their FAL and SAL, children will get exposure to the target language and expand
their vocabulary. They can also use their newly acquired writing skills to support their oral language
development (e.g. writing down words in a vocabulary book is a good strategy for vocabulary development).

Social cohesion

The rationale for the introduction of a Second Additional Language is to promote social cohesion and embrace
diversity and inclusivity (language, culture and race) in the classroom and school. The learning of languages
develops understanding and appreciation of diverse cultures. Learning of a new language should include

CAPS 13
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 cultural practices, customs and habits for example “lowering of eyes when speaking to an elder, cupping of
 hands when saying ‘thank you’, etc.

 Schools should ensure that the language offered at SAL level is one of the official languages and the selection
 of the language is done in consultation with the School Governing Body (SGB). The main aim of the SAL
 curriculum is to promote the usage of the indigenous African languages and support non speakers to learn an
 African language at least at the SAL level in the Foundation Phase commencing in Grade 1. Research findings
 have shown in schools where the Language of Learning and Teaching (LoLT) and First Additional language is
 either English or Afrikaans, many African language learners are not interacting with their peers and teachers in
 these dominant languages. The SAL will open up opportunities for all learners to express themselves in
 languages beyond English and Afrikaans. Teachers will be encouraged to promote languages beyond English
 and Afrikaans to accommodate diversity and multilingualism.

 2.1.2.2 Specific aims

 Learning a Second Additional Language should enable learners to:
 • acquire the language skills necessary to communicate appropriately in the target language at a basic
 level;
 • listen, speak, read/view and write the language with growing confidence and enjoyment. These skills
 and attitudes form the basis for life-long learning;
 • express, orally and in writing, and emotions in order to become comfortable in the language;
 • use langua
 ge and their imagination to find out more about themselves, the different cultures and the world around them.
 This will enable them to express their experiences and findings about the world orally and in writing;
 • use language to access and manage communication in other contexts. Information literacy is a vital
 skill in the ‘information age’ and forms the basis for lifelong learning;
 • use language as a means for expressing information on familiar topics; for interacting with a familiar
 range of texts; and for reading texts for enjoyment, basic information and communication.

 14 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

2.1.3 Teaching the Second Additional Language

In order to learn an Additional Language well, one needs as much exposure to it as possible in order to build
linguistic and basic discourse competence. Teachers should therefore ensure that learners listen to and read
the Additional Language in the time allocated for various purposes. The learners need opportunities to listen to
the Additional Language for information and comprehension (e.g. a dialogue) and for pleasure (e.g. a song).
Even more importantly, they need opportunities to read and view the Additional Language for information (e.g.
instructions to make a sandwich), pleasure (e.g. a simple story). Research shows that the best way to develop
a wide vocabulary is through reading of appropriate texts. It is very important that oral, written and visual texts
are at the right level for learners. If the texts are too difficult, learners will get discouraged and they will not
learn anything; if the texts are too easy, there will be no challenge and little learning will take place. An
important role of the language teacher is to match the level of text to the level of the learner. Throughout the
Foundation Phase, learners should be listening to texts that are in line with their development of listening and
speaking skills.

Learners need to understand the purpose for which they are speaking. Throughout the Foundation Phase,
learners should be doing oral (listening and speaking) exercises that are in line with their developing language
skills. It is necessary that learners get regular and timely feedback on their progress so that they know where
and how to improve. An important role of a language teacher is to provide high quality feedback, which is at the
heart of good assessment.

In Grades 1 -3, it is important that:
 • There is a strong focus on Listening and Speaking
 • There is continued support for the development of vocabulary, sentence and paragraph
 construction, and grammar in context
 • Learners work with a variety of texts, including visual texts. These texts increase in difficulty as
 they move through the grades

2.1.4 The Language Skills for the Second Additional Language

The Second Additional Language (SAL) will be offered in Grades 1 to 3 in all 11 official languages. The focus
of the SAL curriculum is on the development of oral communication skills. The SAL curriculum will cover these
main skills, namely:

CAPS 15
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Listening and speaking: Oral Thinking and Reasoning and Language
 communication and language development Structure skills and use will be
 skills integrated with listening and speaking
  Emergent Literacy Skills (Phonological and emergent literacy skills
 awareness, phonemic awareness, emergent
 reading and writing)

 The focus of the SAL is on communicative language teaching and the development of basic
 interpersonal communicative skills (BICS). The focus will be mainly on listening and speaking activities
 which includes learning greetings, responding to instructions, making requests, using formulaic language and
 participating in simple dialogues using language chunks.

 When the teacher introduces the SAL in Grade 1, he/she needs a simple way to get the idea of an ‘additional
 language’ across to her young learners. A good way of doing so is by means of a puppet, which can be given
 a name in the additional language, for example,Pule the Puppet. In the first lesson, the teacher introduces the
 puppet and tells the learners that Pule can’t speak their home language; he can only speak, e.g. Setswana, so
 they will have to speak Setswana to Pule. Pule will then become a permanent feature of the SAL class. The
 teacher could introduce a second puppet (e.g. Palesa the Puppet) in order to demonstrate interactions in the
 SAL class (e.g. greetings).

 When languages are learned orally, there needs to be a lot of repetition to support memorisation. Action songs
 and poems, repeated storytelling and shared reading should therefore be the main activities of the SAL
 curriculum. Children can also be taught formulaic language, for example, greetings. Another method that
 works well is Total Physical Response (TPR) whichis a form of nonverbal communication, e.g. children
 respond to instructions and commands in a fun way through games such as ‘Simon says…’. Action songs and
 poems are another form of TPR. Choral drilling of key vocabulary and language chunks learnt from stories
 (told and read), songs and poems should be routine activities.

 Key vocabulary and phrases from the stories, songs and rhymes can be used in the classroom context in order
 to incorporate them in daily routines and enhance opportunities for their acquisition and use by the children.
 Word walls can be created to remind the teacher and learners of the vocabulary that has been taught. Once

 16 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 children can write in their HL, these words can be written in their personal dictionaries (vocabulary books) and
 incorporated into vocabulary games and quizzes.

 Once children can read and write in their HL (by the end of Grade 1), they can use this as a resource to lea rn
 the SAL. For example, they can read Big Books containing plentiful illustrations and simple text with their
 teacher. They can read classroom print in the SAL (e.g. labels, word walls, posters), and read very simple
 books in the SAL if these are in the reading corner. They can write new words in a personal dictionary
 (vocabulary book) and learn them. This will give children more exposure to the SAL and enable them to
 develop their vocabulary.

 The SAL Curriculum for Foundation Phase has been packaged as follows:
  content, concepts and skills to be taught per term
  guidelines for time allocation
  suggestions for informal assessment
  lists of recommended resources per grade

 2.1.5 Types of literacies

SAL lessons should include oral, visual, numerical and textual literacies. Teachers are encouraged to use the
Home Language to support the teaching of SAL where it is relevant and appropriate. The alphabet and script used
in African languages are the same as those used for English and Afrikaans. For example SAL learners will be able
to count and recognise the number symbols but will have to learn the number names in the new language. The use
of counting songs and poems is encouraged to teach number names, days of week, months of the year, etc. The
approach to teaching phonemic awareness will depend on the language that is being taught.

Story telling supported with visual and auditory resources is encouraged to introduce textual literacy. Big Books and
Conversational posters with visuals only are recommended in Grade 1. In Grade 2 texts with key words and
language chunks should be used. In Grade 3 texts with simple repetitive words, language chunks and sentences
should be used to promote emergent literacy.
 Listening and Speaking Literacy

CAPS 17
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Learning an additional language is much like learning a home language except that it happens later in children’s
 lives. In the first year of their lives, children hear huge amounts of simple language in context, which enables them
 to gradually absorb the grammar and vocabulary of their home language. After a year or so, children start
 speaking their home language but not in full sentences. They begin by producing one or two words, which they
 use to express a range of meanings and purposes. They can understand much more complex language than they
 can express.

 It is important for teachers to keep this in mind when children are learning an additional language. In Grade1,
 learners need to be exposed to lots of oral language in the form of stories and classroom instructions. Listening to
 stories being told is an excellent way for children to acquire their additional language. The teacher needs to:

  choose a story with a simple and repetitive structure, which allows the learners to engage with the
 text through chorusing patterned language (language chunks)
  keep her language very simple, speaking slowly but naturally
  use gestures, pictures and real objects to introduce new vocabulary and support understanding of
 the story
  tell the story several times, gradually involving the children more and more, for example by joining
 in the refrains
  write key vocabulary on flash cards and put them on the word wall.

 Another way of exposing children to the additional language is through listening to stories (or non-fiction texts)
 read by the teacher. The teacher reads from a Big Book, a large illustrated book with enlarged print that all the
 learners can see as she reads. This is called ‘Shared Reading’. One of the advantages of Shared Reading is
 that as well as being an excellent listening activity, it also develops learners’ emergent literacy. Children
 learn, for example, concepts of print (e.g. that we start reading at the front of a book and end at the back; and
 that we read from left to right and top to bottom of a page), and they begin to recognise a few written words in
 the additional language (e.g. he, she). Learners should be familiar with the activity of Shared Reading since
 they will also be doing it in their HL and FAL lessons. It will support language learning if the same story is told
 in HL, FAL and SAL where possible.

 Another excellent way of exposing children to the additional language is by giving simple instructions that they
 respond to physically; for example, the teacher says, ‘Come here, Thabo,’ with an accompanying gesture, and
 he responds. This method, known as Total Physical Response, has the advantage that the teacher can see

 18 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 immediately whether Thabo understands or not and she can provide feedback – either ‘Well done, Thabo,’ or
 she can repeat the instruction more slowly with the gesture emphasized more strongly. Classroom language
 (e.g. Come to the front of the class and sit on the mat) provides many opportunities for natural ways of
 introducing Total Physical Response. Action songs and poems too, are an excellent way of combining
 language with physical activity in a way that supports both understanding and memory of the language.

 The advantage of the three methods described above (listening to stories, Shared Reading and Total Physical
 Response) is that they all focus on learning language through listening comprehension. This takes the
 pressure off young learners having to speak, reduces anxiety and allows them to focus on understanding the
 language. However, in order to become competent users of the language, learners also have to practise
 speaking.

 Initially, learners’ spoken language will be formulaic – memorised songs and action poems are some formulaic
 language learned as languagechunks, for example, ‘Good morning, how are you?’ ‘I’m fine, how are
 you?’ But gradually, as children begin to understand the additional language, they need to start talking, initially
 with one or two word utterances. For example, in response to the teacher’s question, ‘Did you like the story,’ a
 learner answers ‘Yes’ or ‘No.’ Games are a good way of reinforcing language and actively involving children in
 learning. For example, the teacher can use a ring to teach formulaic language. One child begins by asking
 ‘What is your name?’ The next child answers (e.g. Zuki) and then asks the next child ‘What is your name?’
 and so on until every child has interacted.

 At first, learners’ emergent spoken language needs to be scaffolded (i.e. modelled and supported). For
 example, learners can begin by reciting/singing action songs and poems, repeating language chunks, choral
 drilling of vocabulary and later engaging in simple role plays, dialogues, etc. With the teacher’s help, the
 children can retell parts of the story using props (e.g. masks, puppets, etc.) The teacher needs to make sure
 that all the children get opportunities to speak in the new additional language in safe and supportive
 environment. Because children will progress at a different pace, the teacher needs to tailor speaking
 opportunities to include pointing to and naming the objects in pictures and in the classroom, etc. As the children
 move through the grades, the teacher should expect children to speak more and their utterances should
 become longer.

 Listening and Speaking activities are organised around themes. It is recommended that the teacher selects at
 least two themes per term in Grade 1 and Grade 2 and three themes in Grade 3. The teacher needs to select

CAPS 19
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 themes that lend themselves to teaching an additional language. The themes should be very familiar to
 learners, preferably already used in the HL and FAL.

 The reason for using themes is to make it possible to constantly recycle vocabulary and language structures in
 meaningful contexts. For example, words related to the body (face, eyes, ears, nose, mouth, arms, legs, feet,
 etc.) and the structures in which they are situated (Point to your _____. /This is my _____. /These are my
 _____.) need to be heard repeatedly in context; learners then need opportunities to use them. Only if
 vocabulary and structures are constantly recycled, will learners be able to remember and use them.

 Emergent Literacy

 In the SAL the focus is on the development of Emergent literacy namely oral language through listening and
 speaking activities (songs, poems, language chunks, commands, instructions, story telling), phonological
 awareness (awareness of spoken sound and how these sounds are blended together to form words),print
 awareness, phonic knowledge (letter sound relationships, decoding, blending , segmenting) and emergent
 writing skills.

 Emergent reading skills (e.g. pointing to objects, picture reading, sequencing pictures, etc.) are introduced
 through story telling, Shared Reading and Read Aloud modelled by the teacher. Later, in Grade 3, emergent
 writing activities can be integrated with emergent reading activities.

 Phonological Awareness and Phonemic Awareness

 The first stage of learning to decode written language is oral through using phonological awareness and
 phonemic awareness skills. Both are important and reliable predictors of a child’s later reading ability. Ideas for
 teaching phonological and phonemic awareness skills include:
  Hearing repeated sounds (word play) in songs and poems
  Clapping words in spoken sentences
  Clapping syllables in spoken words
  Segmenting spoken words into syllables and blending them together again
  Identifying the sounds at the beginning/middle/end of spoken words
  Clapping individual sounds (phonemes) in spoken words

 20 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Segmenting spoken words into sounds and blending them together again
  Identification of letter-sound relationships

 Incidental discussion and teaching of letter-sound relationships in the new language should take place in Grade
 3. By this time the phonics in Home Language and FAL will be in place. Discussions will be about similarities
 and differences in the sounds of the letters of the alphabet in SAL, e.g. the letter “a” ant (English); “a” appel
 (Afrikaans) and “a” abantwana (isiZulu).

 Shared Reading

 Shared Reading is the dominant reading methodology that will be used to develop reading skills in the SAL
 from Grade 1 onwards. Shared Reading is an important focus for language and literacy development. The
 purpose of Shared Reading in Grades 1 to 3 is to give learners exposure to their SAL in a meaningful,
 supportive context. It also develops learners’ emergent literacy in their additional language. At the Grade 1
 level, the teacher should:
  choose very simple enlarged visual texts (e.g. a Big Book, Conversational posters) with plenty of
 clear illustrations.
  engage the learners in “picture walk and talk” activities.
  tell a story related to the pictures.
  encourage children to repeat parts of the story that is told.

 In Grades 2 and 3 the texts for Shared Reading (Big Books) should include words, language chunks and
 short sentences. The teacher should:
  talk about the pictures with the learners so that they understand the vocabulary.
  read the text several times using her finger or a ‘pointer’ to enable learners to follow her progress
 through the text.
  ask questions about the story.
  gradually involve learners in ‘reading’ the story.
  write key words (flash cards) for the picture and display them on the word wall (they can also be
 used for practice, revision and games)

CAPS 21
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Comprehension

 In the Second Additional Language the focus is mainly on listening and visual comprehension. This is
 developed by building vocabulary and asking questions that enable learners to engage with the text. The
 teacher should begin with asking questions related to visual text, e.g. naming and pointing to objects and
 simple literal questions (Who? What? Where?).

 2.1.6 Language Structure and Conventions

 In Grades 1-3, language structure and conventions are learned incidentally through meaningful exposure to the
 spoken language. Incidental learning will take place through listening to stories, shared reading, songs and
 poems, total physical response, language chunks and formulaic language.

 For example, when the teacher introduces a new story she will teach the vocabulary using the pictures and/or
 real objects. She would write the words on flash cards and put them on the word wall. She will use these for
 practice and revision and incorporate them into activities such as games.

 2.1.7 Topics and Themes

 Topics and Themes should be chosen carefully so that the language and vocabulary can be recycled often
 and in that way learnt. For instance themes such as Me can be followed My family, My School etc. These same
 themes and topics can be repeated and extended in Grade 2 and 3. Themes should be planned in such way
 that it produces language development for use in social interactions in school and beyond.

 Suggested themes:
 Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 3
 Greetings Greetings Greetings
 Me and My body Me and My body Me and My body
 Friends Friends Friends
 My home My home My home
 My family My family My family
 Clothes Shopping Shopping

 22 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 At school At school At school
 Weather Weather Weather
 Animals Animals Animals
 People who help us People who help us People who help us
 Food Food Food
 Sports Sports Sports
 Seasons
 Transport
 The farm
 Sports
 Celebrations (birthdays, Celebrations (birthdays, Celebrations (birthdays,
 festivals, etc.) festivals, etc.) festivals, etc)

 2.1.8 Pedagogy and Methodology

 The pedagogy should encourage co-operative, participatory and interactive learning and teaching through pair
 work, small group activities and learners should be given plenty opportunities to express themselves in the new
 language by using language chunks (respond to greetings, engage in dialogues, play language games, action
 songs etc.). A multi-sensory approach is encouraged. The new language should be learnt in a fun way
 through choral drilling, total physical response, role-play, chanting of action songs and poems supported by
 visual, auditory and kinaesthetic activities. Teachers must look for opportunities for the learners to use and
 demonstrate their newly acquired language skills (greetings in all 3 languages, singing birthday songs, items
 for school concerts, open days, etc.)

 2.1.9 Classroom Management and Resources

 South African classrooms are very diverse and inclusive. It is common to have learners who speak more than
 one Home Language which may not be the Language of Learning and Teaching (LoLT) of the school. In some
 contexts the language offered at Second Additional Language (SAL) may be the Home Language of some
 learners. In such contexts the teacher of the SAL will have to plan activities to accommodate the Home
 Language speakers and the SAL learners. Teachers should use Home Language speakers as models and
 support them to take the lead in peer teaching sessions where they can support the SAL learners (non-
 speakers).

CAPS 23
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 The use of the Home Language should be used initially to support the teaching of the Second Additional
 Language. Word walls can be created to remind the teacher and learners of the vocabulary that has been
 taught in the three different languages. Teachers are encouraged to use colour coding to differentiate between
 the key vocabulary for Home Language, First Additional Language and Second Additional Language.
 Language games such as (Simon says, I spy etc) should be used to teach language chunks and key
 vocabulary. Resources such as (realia, conversational posters, Big Books, Anthology of stories, songs and
 poems, masks, puppets including teacher and learner made Big Books, zig-zag books should be used .

 2.2 ASSESSMENT IN THE SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE

 Assessment practices in the SAL should be informal and continuous (respond to greetings, commands, making
 instructions, recite action songs and poems, engage in dialogues, participate in role-play, respond to stories,
 name objects, etc.) Most of the assessment should take place through observation, oral responses and
 demonstration. The teacher records the results of the assessment using a checklist. The Second Additional
 Language will not be considered for promotion and progression in Grades 1 to 3.

 2.3 TIME ALLOCATION AND TIME TABLING

 The recommended teaching time for Second Additional Language in the Intermediate Phase is 1 hour per
 week. Schools are therefore encouraged to use creative ways to implement the 1 hour of SAL per week in
 Grades 1-3. The following timetable options are suggested:
  4 periods x 15 minutes for SAL per week (Monday to Thursday)
  3 periods x 20 minutes for SAL per week (e.g. Monday to Wednesday)
  2 periods x 30 minutes for SAL per week (e.g. Monday and Thursday)

 The teacher provisioning model should inform the timetable arrangements for SAL.

 24 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

2.4 PROMOTION AND PROGRESSION: GRADES 1 - 3

The promotion and progression requirements in Grades 1 to 3 will not change with the implementation of
the Second Additional Language (SAL). The Second Additional Language will not be considered for
promotion and progression purposes.

2.5 RECORDING AND REPORTING: GRADES 1 - 3

Learner progress in the Second Additional Language needs to be tracked by keeping evidence in the form of
quarterly checklists, observation notes etc. Schools (Teachers) are encouraged to report on learner
performance in the Second Additional Language in quarterly learner reports.

2.6 LEARNING AND TEACHING SUPPORT MATERIALS

The teacher should have:
a) A Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement
b) Language in Education Policy (LiEP)
c) Dictionaries and reference books (bilingual and multilingual dictionaries; thesaurus; encyclopaedia, a good
grammar reference book, etc.)
d) The Foundation Phase Second Additional Language LTSM Toolkit:
  Lesson Plans;
  Big Books;
  Conversational Posters aligned to SAL themes;
  An Anthology of stories, poems and songs;
  Audio (compact disk) with songs, action poems and dialogues
e) A Teacher’s Resource File/Book: this may be a file made up of materials collected by the teacher or a
commercially published Teacher’s Guide
f) Access to reading material in a class, school and/or public library in order to guide learners’ reading
g) Audio/visual aids

CAPS 25
 26
 SECTION 3

 3.1 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS AND TEACHING PLANS

 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE (SAL) GRADES 1-3
 GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3
  Responds to simple greetings using  Responds to and models simple greetings  Respond to and use greetings and
 language chunks (e.g. ‘Good morning’, Molo, and farewells, using language chunks, (e.g. farewells confidently.
 Sawubona) ‘Good morning.’ ‘How are you?’ ‘I’m fine’) in  Memorises and performs simple poems
  Responds to simple greetings and farewells pairs and small groups. and action songs in pairs and groups with
  Sings simple songs and does actions with  Sings simple songs and does actions with confidence and enthusiasm
 guidance (with teacher, in pairs and small guidance in pairs and small groups  Continues to develop an oral vocabulary
 groups) (songs related to the chosen topic or  Joins in action poems and songs, doing the using themes or topics
 theme) actions in pairs and small groups  Identifies a person, an animal or object
  Recites simple poems related to chosen  Role plays simple short dialogues with from a simple oral description, with 2/3
 themes with the teacher, in pairs and small support of the teacher modelling greetings clues in pairs and small groups (e.g. ‘I
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 groups and farewells in pairs and small groups (e.g. have two legs. I can fly. Who am I?’)

 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
  Responds to commands (e.g. Stand up, sit ‘Hello my name is ____. What is your  Identifies and names real objects in the
 down.) name? What do you like?’) new language (book, pencil, shoe, shirt
  Follows simple classroom instructions (e.g.  Points to and names objects in the etc.)

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ‘Clap your hands’)with teacher and in pairs classroom or in a picture in response to  Participates in simple role-plays and
  Points to objects in the classroom or in a teacher’s instructions, (e.g. ‘Show me the dialogues with (2-3 sentences) with
 picture (e.g. ‘Show me the chair. Point to girl in the red dress’). support of teacher modelling greetings,
 the...’)  Begins to develop an oral vocabulary using farewells/short conversations in pairs and
  Plays language games (e.g. Simple Simon themes or topics. small groups
 Says: Touch your head, etc.)with teacher and  Plays language games (e.g. ‘Simon says’) in  Responds to and makes simple requests
 in pairs. pairs and small groups.  Uses some formulaic language (e.g.

CAPS
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. ‘please’,  Makes simple requests, (e.g. ‘May I go to ‘Excuse me; I’m sorry’ ,Today, Tomorrow,
 ‘ thank you’) the toilet? Can I have a pencil, please?’) Yesterday)
  Role plays greetings (2 sentences) in pairs  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. please  Role-plays and participates in a short
 and in small groups (e.g. ‘Good Morning and thank you, excuse me, I’m sorry) conversation using some formulaic
 Thando, How are you?’ ‘ Good morning  Responds physically to simple oral language (2-4 sentences) with support of
 Thando, I am fine’) instructions given by the teacher teacher (e.g. meeting and greeting) in
  Begins to develop oral (listening and individually, pairs and small groups (e.g. pairs and small groups.
 speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics ‘Stand in a line.’)  Talks about objects in a picture in
  Responds to simple questions asked by the response to the teacher’s instructions (e.g.
 teacher and peers who take the role of ‘What can you see in the picture?’ ‘Tell
 teacher (e.g. ‘What is your name? Where do me what you can see in the picture.’)
 you live?’)  Plays language games inside and outside
 the classroom with peers and in small
 groups under teacher supervision.
  Responds physically to simple oral
 instructions given by teacher, individually
 and in pairs
  Understand s and responds to simple
 questions asked by the teacher and
 learners who take the role of the teacher

 27
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3
 28
 Story telling Story telling (e.g. ‘What, Who, Where, How’)
  Listens to short, simple stories told by the  Listens to short and simple stories told or  Makes simple requests and statements in
 teacher read with enjoyment and joins in choruses the new language with the support of the
  Listens to short, simple stories told by the at the appropriate time and repeats teacher (e.g. ‘May I have a glass of
 teacher language chunks where appropriate in pairs water?’, ‘Can I go outside and play,
 and repeats language chunks at the and small groups; please?’)
 appropriate time  Names some of the things in the picture in  Takes turns to give simple instructions and
  Pointing out and name the object in the response to questions from the teacher (e.g. commands during language games to
 pictures. What? Who?) peers
  Answers simple literal questions about the  Follows a short sequence of 2-3
 story instructions given by the teacher,( ‘Come
 with the support of the pictures, (e.g. What, with your friend to the front of the
 Who, Where) classroom’)
  Role-plays parts of the story using gestures  Listens to a simple recount, given by
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 and props (masks, puppets etc) teacher (2 sentences) telling about what
 she did
  With help from the teacher, gives a simple
 recount (1-2 sentences), for example,

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 learners tell the teacher about the weather

 Story telling
  Listens to short stories told and read with
 enjoyment and joins in choruses at the
 Development of concepts, vocabulary and Development of concepts, vocabulary and appropriate time and repeats language
 language structures language structures chunks where appropriate in pairs and

CAPS
  Respond to greetings and commands  continues to build oral vocabulary small groups;
  Repeats some language chunks confidently  uses some language chunks confidently  Answers simple literal questions about a
  Begins to develop some oral vocabulary  responds to simple requests, commands story with short answers (Who, What,
 and instructions Where)
  uses simple formulaic language  Makes meaning of the visual text.
  begins to develop understanding and ability  Listens and responds to a short simple
 to use simple language structures in the story read aloud by the teacher
 context of meaningful spoken language eg.  Role-plays parts of the story using
 personal pronouns (I, my, we etc) gestures and props (masks, puppets etc)
  responds to question forms  Tells parts of the story with teacher’s
  understands and use verbs in simple support
 conversations
  responds to commands/imperatives Development of concepts, vocabulary and

  responds to simple requests, commands language structures

 and instructions  uses language chunks confidently
  responds to simple requests, commands
 and instructions
  uses simple formulaic language
  begins to develop understanding and
 ability to use simple language structures
 in the context of meaningful spoken

 29
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3
 30
 language e.g. personal pronouns (I, my,
 we etc)
  responds to question forms
  understands and use verbs in simple
 conversations
  responds to commands/imperatives
  continues to build and model the acquired
 vocabulary and language chunks in simple
 dialogues
  uses some negative forms e.g. I cannot
 swim etc
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 3.2 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE (SAL) GRADES 1-3
 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE (SAL) GRADES 1-3

CAPS
 GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3
 Phonological awareness Phonological Awareness Phonological and Phonemic Awareness
  Claps out words in actions songs,  Claps hands/ clicks fingers/ jumps/  Segments spoken words into syllables and blends
 poems, short spoken sentences (Ek stamp feet on syllables in words in them together again
 skop die bal, realeboga; ngiyathokoza; familiar words and spoken  Uses syllable cards to build words (look, say and
 enkosi; etc.) sentences. do)
  Claps out syllables in key words in  Segments and blends spoken  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of
 spoken word (Sa-wu-bo-na; Du-me- words into syllables ( e.g. u-ma-ma, spoken words
 lang; Mo-lo; Goei-e-mô-re; etc.), song, umama)  Identifies the number of sounds in each syllable in

 LITERACY
 poem, story  Segments and blends sounds in familiar words
  Claps hands/ clicks fingers/ jumps/ oral words, e.g. u-ba-ba, ubaba.  Identifies letter-sound relationships of single
 stamp feet on syllables in words,  Identifies the sounds at the letters that have the same pronunciation in Home
 songs, poem, story( e.g. Si- ya-bon- beginning of spoken words Language and Second Additional Language (e.g.
 ga)  Identifies the sounds at the end of d, f, g, h, l, m, n, s, etc.). Do at least one sound a

 EMERGENT
  Hearing repeated sounds (in word spoken words, e.g. baleka week.
 play)  Identifies the sounds at the  Identifies some sounds that may be different, e.g.
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning beginning and end of spoken words vowels.
 of spoken words (inhloko; ikhanda;  Segments oral sentences into  Claps individual sounds (phonemes) in spoken
 neus; etc.) individual words by clapping on words
  Segments spoken words by clapping each word  Identifies some more initial sounds which may be
 on each syllable (e.g. words from the different in the SAL from the Home Language

 31
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3
 story) Shared reading Shared reading

32
 Shared Reading
  Listens to the story read while  Listens to short stories, recounts or non-fiction
  Story telling (simple stories linked to
 following the teacher and looking at texts told or read from a Big Book or illustrated
 the theme) with resources such as Big
 the pictures (Big Book, poster for enjoyment and joins in choruses at the
 Books, visuals, puppets etc.
 Conversational poster etc) appropriate time
  Engages with visuals in Big Books/
  Reads the text aloud with the  Follows the text read by the teacher. In
 conversational posters with the
 teacher. The whole class reads the subsequent readings of the same text with the
 teacher.
 same story or non-fiction text with teacher and peers reads more fluently with
  After repeated visual engagements,
 the teacher. expression.
 repeats key vocabulary (look hear, say
  Talks about the pictures in the story  Reads the text aloud with the teacher. The whole
 and do)
 using the SAL as much as possible class reads the same story or non-fiction text with
  After repeated storytelling, repeats
 but the Home Language where the teacher
 language chunks
 necessary  Answers simple literal questions about a story with
  Listens to the story told while following
  Identifies and names objects in the short answers, (Where What Who, How)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 the teacher and looking at the pictures
 pictures (e.g. ‘Show me the old  Names some of the things in the picture in
  Identifies objects in the pictures (e.g.
 man.’ ‘Point to the dog.’) response to questions from the teacher and peers
 ‘Show me Thandi’s teacher. ‘Point
  Answers some simple questions (e.g. ‘What this?’ A fish’)
 to …’’)
 with the support of the pictures  Recognises and reads some common words in

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
  Talks about the pictures in the story
 (e.g. ‘Who? What? Where?) the SAL print in the classroom, e.g. wall display.
 using the SAL as much as possible but
  After repeated readings, joins in  Reads fluently, the Shared reading text covered in
 the Home Language where
 choruses and repeats language Term 1 and 2 in small groups
 necessary
 chunks where appropriate in pairs  Makes meaning and responds to simple literal
  Participates in story lessons by
 repeating key vocabulary and and small groups questions (Who, What, Where, How )based on
 engaging with visuals in pairs and in  Responds to some simple literal Shared Reading text

CAPS
 small groups questions related to the story  Acts out parts of the story, using some of the
  After repeated readings, joins in  Begins to recognise some written dialogue in pairs and small groups using simple
 choruses and repeats language words in SAL in the Shared props, masks and puppets in pairs and small
 chunks where appropriate in pairs and Reading activity. groups.
 small groups  Learns some oral vocabulary from  With help from the teacher, retells parts of the
  Learns some oral vocabulary from the story story in pairs.
 visual texts (Big Book, Poster etc.)  Recognises and reads some
  Participates in story lessons by common words in the SAL print in
 responding to simple oral questions the classroom, e.g. wall display
 .  Acts out parts of the story using
 some gestures and simple
 language chunks in pairs and in
 small groups using simple props,
 masks and puppets in pairs and
 small groups.

 33
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

3.3 REQUIREMENTS GRADE 1
3.3.1 GRADE 1 TERM 1
 GRADE 1 SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE
 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME PER WEEK: 1 HOUR
 GRADE 1 TERM 1
LISTENING AND SPEAKING

CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
Learners need to be exposed to plenty of very simple spoken language that they can understand from
the context. Vocabulary needs to be constantly recycled so that learners do not forget it. Learning the
SAL should be relaxed and fun.
In the first lesson, a puppet can be used to introduce the Second Additional Language. The puppet
can be given a name in the Second Additional Language e.g. Pule the Puppet. The teacher introduces
the puppet and says Pule can’t speak their Home Language, he can only speak the Second Additional
Language, and so learners will have to speak that language to him. Pule will then become a
permanent part of the Second Additional Language class.

Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions. They should make sure that they have
the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme they have
chosen.

Weekly activities
At least two of the following activities should be done in a lesson in a week
 Responds to simple greetings using phrases (e.g. ‘Good morning’, Molo, Sawubona)
 Sings simple songs and does actions with guidance (e.g. Head and shoulders…)
 Recites simple poems and does actions with guidance (e.g. I touch my head, I touch my toes, I touch my
 knees, I touch my nose. Head, toes, knees, nose!
 Plays language games (e.g. Simple Simon Says: Touch your head, etc.)

Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
Through taking part in the above activities:

 34 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Responds to greetings and commands

 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment:
 Oral and/or practical /Observation
  Responds to simple greetings
  Participates in singing simple action songs

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological awareness
  Claps out words in actions songs and poems
  Claps hands/ clicks fingers/ jumps/ stamp feet on syllables in words e.g. Si- ya-bon-ga

 Shared Reading
 Activities done once a week using Big Books with plentiful illustrations or other forms of enlarged,
 illustrated text e.g. posters. The same book or poster can be read used several times and even re-
 introduced at a later stage. Teacher introduces vocabulary and models the process of reading.
  Engages with visuals in Big Book/ Conversational posters with the teacher.
  After repeated visual engagements, repeats key vocabulary (look hear, say and do)
  Story telling (simple stories linked to the theme where possible) with resources such as Big Book, visuals,
 puppets, etc.
  After repeated storytelling, joins in choruses where appropriate repeating language chunks.
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment:
 Oral and/or practical /Observation
  Claps out words in actions songs and poems
  Claps out syllables in words from a story that is told after repeated telling
  Responds to visuals by pointing to objects in the pictures in response to instructions from the teacher (e.g.
 Point to the …)

CAPS 35
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.3.2 GRADE 1 TERM 2
 GRADE 1 TERM 2
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions. Teachers should make sure that they
 have the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme they have
 chosen.

 Weekly activities
 At least two of the following activities should be done in a lesson in a week
  Begins to develop an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics selected for this term
  Responds to simple greetings (e.g. ‘Good morning ... How are you?’) with the teacher and in pairs.
  Sings simple songs and does actions with guidance with the teacher and in pairs
  Responds to commands (e.g. Stand up, sit down.)
  Plays language games (e.g. Simple Simon Says)with teacher and in pairs.

 Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures and props to support meaning. Stories that are
 told should be from a Big Book, an Anthology or illustrated poster where all the children can see the
 pictures.The story is supported with clear visuals, objects, toys and puppets.
  Listens to short and simplestories told with enjoyment and joins in choruses or patterned language
 (repetition of language chunks) at the appropriate time

 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Through taking part in the above activities:
  Begins to develop some oral vocabulary
  Responds and repeat language chunks e.g. How are you?
  Responds to commands
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment:
 Oral and/or practical /Observation
  Responds to simple greetings (e.g. ‘Good morning.’ ‘How are you?)
  Responds appropriately to simple commands (e.g. Simon says….)
  Sings a simple song and does actions

 36 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and Speaking.
 Phonological awareness:
  Hearing repeated sounds (in word play)
  Claps out syllables in key words in song, poem , story
  Claps out syllables in spoken words (Sa-wu-bo-na; Du-me-lang; Mo-lo; Goei-e-mô-re; etc.)
 Shared Reading
 Activities done at least once a week using Big Books with plentiful illustrations or other forms of
 enlarged, illustrated text. The same book can be used several times and even re-introduced at a later
 stage. Teacher introduces vocabulary and models the process of reading.
  Engages with visuals in Big Book/ Conversational posters with the teacher.
  After repeated visual engagements repeats key vocabulary (look hear, say and do)
  Story telling (simple stories linked to the theme) with resources such as Big Book, visuals, puppets etc.
  After repeated storytelling, repeats key vocabulary with the teacher
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment:
 Oral and/or practical /Observation
  Participates in word play by clapping out syllables in spoken words.
  Engages with visuals in Big Book/ Conversational posters with the teacher and repeats key vocabulary
 (look hear, say and do).

CAPS 37
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.3.3 GRADE 1 TERM 3
 GRADE 1 TERM 3
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions. Teachers should make sure that they
 have the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme they have
 chosen.

 Weekly activities
 At least two of the following activities should be done in each lesson:
  Begins to develop an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics selected for this
 term
  Responds to simple greetings with confidence in pairs.
  Points to objects in the classroom or in a picture (e.g. ‘Show me the chair’. ‘Point to the ….’)
  Recites simple poems and does actions with the teacher and in pairs.
  Follows simple classroom instructions (e.g. ‘Clap your hands’)with teacher and in pairs
  Responds to commands using language games (Simon says )
  Sings simple songs and does actions in pairs and small groups (e.g. songs related to chosen themes)
  Recites simple poems and does actions with guidance in small groups (e.g. simple poems related to the
 chosen themes)

 Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures and props to support meaning. Stories that are
 told should be from a Big Book or an illustrated poster where all the children can see the pictures.
  Listens to short stories told with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time (e.g. It’s Monday,
 it’s Monday and Thandi goes to school, school, school!)
  Names some of the things in the pictures (e.g. What is this?’ - pointing to the object in the picture.)

 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Through taking part in the above activities begins to develop some oral vocabulary
  Repeats and respond to language chunks
  Recites poems and sing songs
  Follows instructions and commands
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment:

 38 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Oral and/or practical /Observation
  Responds to simple greetings with confidence in pairs.
  Points to objects in the classroom or in a picture (e.g. ‘Show me the chair’. ‘Point to the ….’)
  Responds to commands using language games (Simon says…)

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological Awareness to be integrated with listening and speaking activities
  Hearing repeated sounds (in word play)
  Claps hands/ clicks fingers/ jumps/ stamp feet on syllables in words(song, poem, story)
  Claps words in short spoken sentences (rea leboga; ngiyathokoza; enkosi; ek skop die bal; etc.)
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning of spoken words
 Shared Reading
 Activities done once a week using Big Books with plentiful illustrations or other forms of enlarged,
 illustrated text. The same book can be read several times and even re-introduced at a later stage.
  Listens to the story told while following the teacher and looking at the pictures
  Learns some oral vocabulary from visual text (Big Book, Poster etc.)
  Identifies objects in the pictures (e.g. ‘Show me Thandi’s teacher.’)
  Talks about the pictures using home language where necessary
  Participates in story lessons by repeating key vocabulary and engaging with visuals in pairs and in small
 groups
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Assessment:
 Informal
 Oral and/or practical/Observation
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning of spoken words
  Talks about the pictures using home language where necessary
  Identifies objects in the pictures (e.g. ‘Show me Thandi’s teacher.’)

CAPS 39
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.3.4 GRADE 1 TERM 4

 GRADE 1 TERM 4
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Note that the themes/topics proposed are simply suggestions. Teachers should make sure that they
 have the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme they have
 chosen.

 Weekly activities
 Two or more of the following activities to be done in each lesson:
  Begins to develop an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics from HL and FAL
  Responds to simple greetings and farewells (e.g. ‘Good bye.’ ‘Go well.’ ‘Good afternoon.’)
  Points to and names objects in the classroom or in a picture (e.g. Show me the ... in the poster. Point to
 the ….)
  Follows simple instructions (e.g. Waves goodbye.)
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. ‘please’, ‘thank you’)
  Sings simple songs and does actions with guidance in pairs and small groups.
  Recites simple poems and does actions with guidance in pairs and small groups
  Role play greetings (2 sentences) in pairs and in small groups (e.g. Good Morning Thando, How are you?
 Good morning Thando I am fine.)

 Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures and props to support meaning. Stories that are
 told should be from a Big Book or illustrated poster where all the children can see the pictures.
  Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time (e.g. theme related
 stories)
  Names some of the things in the picture (e.g. Who is this? - pointing to the object/animal in the picture)

 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
  Through taking part in the above activities begins to develop some oral vocabulary.
  Repeats and responds to language chunks
  Responds to instructions and commands.
  Uses some formulaic language.

 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment:
 Oral and/or practical /Observation
  Sings action songs and poems with confidence
  Follows simple instructions (e.g. Touch your head. Touch your toes.)

 40 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Role plays greetings (2 sentences) in pairs and in small groups (e.g. Good Morning Thando, How are
 you? Good morning Thando I am fine.)

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological awareness
 These activities should be integrated in Listening and Speaking and Shared Reading activities
  Claps hands/ clicks fingers/ jumps/ stamp feet on syllables in words in spoken sentences
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning of spoken words (inhloko; ikhanda; neus; etc.)
  Segments spoken words by clapping on each syllable (e.g. words from the story)
 Shared Reading
 Activities done once a week using Big Books with plentiful illustrations or other forms of enlarged
 illustrated text. The same book can be read several times and even re-introduced at a later stage.
  Listens to the story or non-fiction text while following the teacher and looking at the pictures
  Talks about the pictures in the story using the SAL as much as possible but the Home Language where
 necessary
  Identifies objects in the pictures (e.g. ‘Show me …’. ‘Point to …’)
  Learns some oral vocabulary related to themes selected
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups
  Participates in story lessons by responding to simple oral questions
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment:
 Oral and/or practical/Observation
  Segments spoken words by clapping on each syllable
  Recognises and names some objects in the pictures
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups

CAPS 41
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 RECOMMENDED RESOURCES FOR THE YEAR
  Posters and pictures to support the teaching of stories and vocabulary
  Colour and number charts
  Songs and action poems
  Real objects related to the themes and topics
  Props to act out the stories, for example, masks, puppets etc
  CDs, DVDs and television programmes
  Big Books (with visuals)
  Anthology of stories, poems and songs
  Teacher/Learner made Big Books, Zig-zag books , puppets, masks, flash cards etc

 42 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.4 REQUIREMENTS GRADE 2
 3.4.1 GRADE 2 TERM 1
 GRADE 2 SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE
 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME PER WEEK: 1 HOUR

 GRADE 2 TERM 1
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING

 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Teachers should select two themes that will enable them to introduce and recycle vocabulary, and cover the
 activities listed below.

 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions.
 They should try to cover all the activities, more than once if possible. They should assess their learners using
 the Informal Assessment Activities .They should allow the teacher to constantly recycle simple, basic
 language structures as she communicates with the learners in the Second Additional Language.

 Weekly activities
 Two or more of the following activities in a lesson in the week
  Begins to develop an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics
  Responds to simple greetings and farewells, using phrases, for example, ‘Good morning.’ ‘How are you?’
 ‘ I’m fine’ in pairs and small groups
  Role plays greetings (2 sentences) in pairs and in small groups (e.g. Good Morning Thando, How are
 you? Good morning Nikiwe, I am fine)
  Points to and names objects in the classroom or in a picture in response to teacher’s instructions, for
 example, ‘Show me the girl in the red dress.’
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. please and thank you)
  Sings simple songs and does actions with guidance as a class, for example, ‘This is the way I put on my
 shirt, put on my shirt, put on my shirt.’
  Joins in action poems and songs, doing the actions as a class for example, ‘Here are Gogo’s glasses,
 Here is Gogo’s hat.’
  Plays language games, for example, “Simonsays” in pairs and small groups.
 Once a week, the teacher reads or tells a story. Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures

CAPS 43
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be from a Big Book or illustrated poster
 where all the children can see the pictures
  Listens to short stories told or read with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time and
 repeats patterned language (language chunks) where appropriate as a class
  Names some of the things in the picture in response to questions from the teacher, What? Who?
 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Through taking part in the above activities:
  continues to build oral vocabulary
  Repeats some language chunks confidently
  Responds to instructions and commands
  Uses formulaic language
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Assessment:
 Informal
 Oral and/or practical /Observation
  Sings action songs and poems with confidence
  Follows simple instructions (e.g. Touch your head. Touch your toes.)
  Role plays greetings (2 sentences) in pairs and in small groups (e.g. Good Morning Thando, How are
 you? Good morning Nikiwe, I am fine)

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological Awareness
  Claps hands/ clicks fingers/ jumps/ stamp feet on syllables in words in spoken sentences
  Segments spoken words into syllables
  Segments oral sentences into individual words by clapping on each word, for example, sentences from
 the story
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning of spoken words

 44 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Shared Reading (at least 15 minutes once per week)
 The teacher reads the text to the class, pointing to the words and discussing the pictures and story
 line. She re-reads it during the week, encouraging the learners to join in. The text is used to
 introduce new vocabulary.
  Listens to the story read while following the teacher and looking at the pictures
  Talks about the pictures in the story using the SAL as much as possible but the Home Language where
 necessary
  Identifies objects in the pictures, for example, ‘Show me the old man.’ ‘Point to the dog.’
  Answers some simple oral questions with the support of the pictures, for example, ‘Who? What? Where?’
  Begins to recognise some written words in SAL in the Shared Reading activity
  Learns some oral vocabulary from the story
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Phonological Awareness
  Claps words in spoken sentences
  Segments spoken words into syllables
 Shared Reading: (oral and/or practical)
  Identifies some people, animals and objects in the illustrations in the Big Book (or other form of enlarged
 illustrated text)
  Answers some simple oral questions about the story
  Begins to recognise some written words in SAL in the Shared Reading activity.

CAPS 45
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.4.2 GRADE 2 TERM 2

 GRADE 2 TERM 2
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING

 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Teachers should select two themes that will enable them to introduce and recycle vocabulary, and cover the
 activities listed below.

 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions.
 They should try to cover all the activities, more than once if possible. They should assess their learners using
 the Informal Assessment Activities .They should allow the teacher to constantly recycle simple, basic
 language structures as she communicates with the learners in the Second Additional Language.

 Weekly activities
 Two or more of the following activities in a lesson in a week:
  Begins to develop an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics
  Responds to and models simple greetings and farewells, using language chunks, in pairs and small
 groups for example, Good morning. How are you? I’m fine.
  Role plays short dialogues e.g. “Hello my name is _______. What is your name? What do you like?
  Makes simple requests, for example, ‘May I go to the toilet?’
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. please and thank you)
  Points to and names objects in the classroom or in a picture in response to teacher’s instructions
  Responds physically to simple oral instructions in pairs and small groups, for example, ‘Stand in a line.’
  Sings songs and joins in action poems in pairs and small groups
  Plays language games as a class

 Once a week, the teacher reads or tells a story. Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures
 and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be from a Big Book or illustrated poster
 where all the children can see the pictures
  Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time and repeats patterned
 language where appropriate in pairs and small groups
  Names some of the things in the picture in response to questions from the teacher

 46 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Through taking part in the above activities:
  continues to build oral vocabulary
  repeats some language chunks confidently
  role plays short dialogues e.g. “Hello my name is _______. What is your name? What do you like?
  makes simple requests, for example, ‘May I go to the toilet?’
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)
  Responds to and role plays simple greetings and farewells, using language chunks, in pairs and small
 groups for example, Good morning Pule. How are you? I’m fine Palesa and how are you?
  Demonstrates understanding of some basic oral vocabulary by pointing to objects in the classroom/a
 picture in response to instructions from the teacher.
  Recites action songs and poems with confidence and enthusiasm in pairs and small groups

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness, Phonemic awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and
 Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological and Phonemic Awareness
  Claps hands/ clicks fingers/ jumps/ stamp feet on syllables in familiar words
  Segments and blends syllables in oral words, e.g. u-ma-ma, umama
  Segments and blends sounds in oral words, e.g. u-ba-ba, ubaba.

 Shared Reading (at least 15 minutes once per week)
 The teacher reads the book to the class, pointing to the words and discussing the pictures and story
 line. The teacher-reads the text during the week, encouraging the learners to join in. The text is used
 to introduce new vocabulary.
  Listens to the story or non-fiction text while following the teacher and looking at the pictures
  Talks about the pictures in the story using the SAL as much as possible but the Home Language where
 necessary
  Identifies objects in the pictures

CAPS 47
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Answers some simple questions with the support of the pictures, What, Who, Where
  Learns some oral vocabulary
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups
  Acts out parts of the story using some gestures and simple language chunks in pairs and in small groups
 using simple props, masks and puppets
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Phonological and Phonemic awareness: (oral and/or practical)
  Claps hands/ clicks fingers/ jumps/ stamp feet on syllables in familiar words
  Segments and blends syllables in oral words, e.g. u-ma-ma, umama
  Segments and blends sounds in oral words, e.g. u-ba-ba, ubaba.
 Shared Reading: (oral and/or practical)
  Talks about the pictures in the Big Book/poster
  Answers some simple oral questions about the story or non-fiction text
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups

 48 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.4.3 GRADE 2 TERM 3

 GRADE 2 TERM 3
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Teachers should select two themes that will enable them to introduce and recycle vocabulary, and cover the
 activities listed below.

 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions.Teachers should choose their own
 appropriate themes depending on their context and the resources available. They should make sure
 that they have the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme
 they have chosen.
 They should try to cover all the activities, more than once if possible. They should assess their learners using
 the Informal Assessment Activities .They should allow the teacher to constantly recycle simple, basic
 language structures as she communicates with the learners in the Second Additional Language.

 Weekly activities
 Two or more of the following activities in a lesson in a week:
  Continues to develop an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics
  Responds and to and models simple greetings and farewells, using language chunks, in pairs and small
 groups for example, Good morning. How are you? I’m fine.
  Participates in simple dialogues with support of teacher, modelling greetings and farewells in pairs and
 small groups
  Makes simple requests, for example, ‘Can I have a pencil, please?’
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. ‘Excuse me; I’m sorry’)
  Points to and names objects in the classroom or in a picture in response to teacher’s instructions
  Responds physically to simple oral instructions given by teacher individually and in pairs
  Responds to simple questions asked by the teacher and peers who take the role of teacher, for example,
 ‘What is your name? Where do you live?
  Sings songs and participates in action poems with confidence in pairs and small groups
  Plays language games as a class,

 Once a week the teacher tells or reads a story. Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures
 and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be from a Big Book or illustrated poster
 where all the children can see the pictures
  Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time and repeats patterned
 language where appropriate in pairs and small groups
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers (Who, What, Where)
  Names some of the things in the picture in response to questions from the teacher and peers

CAPS 49
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Through taking part in the above activities:
  continues to build oral vocabulary
  responds to simple requests, commands and instructions
  responds to simple questions related to the story
  participates in simple dialogues with support of teacher
  begins to develop understanding and ability to use simple language structures in the context of
 meaningful spoken language eg. personal pronouns (I, my, we etc)
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)
  Responds physically to simple oral instructions given by teacher individually and in pairs
  Participates in simple dialogues with support of teacher, modelling greetings and farewells in pairs and
 small groups
  Names some objects related to the theme in a picture or in the classroom
  Plays language games in pairs and in small groups.

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness, Phonemic awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and
 Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological and Phonemic Awareness
 These activities should be integrated into Listening and Speaking activities and Shared Reading.
  Segments oral sentences into individual words by clapping on each word, for example, sentences from
 the story
  Claps out the syllables in familiar words
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning of spoken words
  Identifies the sounds at the end of spoken words, e.g. baleka
  Claps out the sounds in words, e.g. i-s-o, and blends them together again, e.g. iso

 Shared Reading (at least 15 minutes once per week)
 The teacher reads the text to the class, pointing to the words and discussing the pictures and story
 line. She re-reads it during the week, encouraging the learners to join in. The text is used to introduce
 new vocabulary.
  Listens to the story or non-fiction text while following the teacher and looking at the pictures

 50 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Talks about the pictures in the story using the SAL
  Identifies and names objects in the pictures using the SAL
  Reads the text aloud with the teacher. The whole class reads the same story or non-fiction text with the
 teacher
  Answers some simple questions with the support of the pictures, for example, Who, What, Where
  Responds to some simple literal questions related to the story
  Learns some oral vocabulary
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups
  Acts out parts of the story using some gestures and simple dialogue in pairs and in small groups using
 simple props, masks and puppets in pairs and small groups.
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Phonological and Phonemic awareness: (oral and/or practical)
  Claps out the sounds in familiar words
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning of spoken words
  Segments oral sentences into individual words by clapping on each word, for example, sentences from the
 story
 Shared Reading: (oral and/or practical)
  Identifies and names objects in the pictures using the SAL
  Answers some simple oral questions about the story or non-fiction text
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups
  Acts out parts of the story using some gestures and simple language chunks in pairs and in small groups

CAPS 51
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.4.4 GRADE 2 TERM 4

 GRADE 2 TERM 4
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Teachers should select two themes that will enable them to introduce and recycle vocabulary, and cover the
 activities listed below.

 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions. They should make sure that they have
 the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme they have
 chosen.

 They should try to cover all the activities, more than once if possible. They should assess their learners using
 the Informal Assessment Activities .They should allow the teacher to constantly recycle simple, basic
 language structures as she communicates with the learners in the Second Additional Language.

 Weekly activities
 Two or more of the following activities in a lesson in a week:
  Continues to develop an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics
  Sings simple songs and does actions with confidence in pairs and small groups
  Recites poems and does actions with confidence in pairs and small groups
  Responds to simple greetings and farewells, using language chunks, for example, Good bye. See you
 later.’
  Participates in simple dialogues with support of teacher, modelling greetings and farewells in pairs and
 small groups
  Makes simple requests, for example, ‘May I leave the classroom?’
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. ‘Excuse me; I’m sorry’)
  Points to and names objects in the classroom or in a picture in response to teacher’s instructions
  Plays language games as a class
  Responds physically to simple oral instructions given by teacher individually and in pairs
  Responds to simple questions asked by the teacher and learners who take the role of teacher, for
 example, ‘What, Who, Where’
 Once a week, the teacher reads or tells a story. Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures
 and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be from a Big Book or illustrated poster
 where all the children can see the pictures.

 52 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time and repeats patterned
 language (language chunks) where appropriate in pairs and small groups;
  Names some of the things in the picture in response to questions from the teacher and peers

 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Through taking part in the above activities:
  Responds to simple questions (e.g. ‘What is your name?’)
  continues to build and model the acquired vocabulary and language chunks in simple dialogues
  Does actions in response to instructions from the teacher, for example, Jump/hop/skip/touch your toes,
 etc. Walk quickly/slowly etc.
  Makes simple requests, for example, ‘May I leave the room?’
  begins to develop understanding and ability to use simple language structures in the context of
 meaningful spoken language eg. personal pronouns (I, my, we etc)
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)
  Responds to simple questions (e.g. ‘What is your name?’)
  Participates in simple dialogues with support of teacher, modelling greetings and farewells in pairs and
 small groups
  Makes simple requests, for example, ‘May I leave the room?’
  Does actions in response to instructions from the teacher, for example, ‘Jump/hop/skip/touch your toes,
 etc.’ ‘ Walk quickly/slowly etc.’

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness, Phonemic awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and
 Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological and Phonemic Awareness
  Claps out the sounds in familiar words
  Segments spoken words into sounds and blending them together again
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Segments oral sentences into individual words by clapping on each word

 Shared Reading (at least 15 minutes once per week)

CAPS 53
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 The teacher reads the book to the class, pointing to the words and discussing the pictures and story
 line. She re-reads it during the week, encouraging the learners to join in. The story or non-fiction text
 is used to introduce new vocabulary.
  Listens and responds to the story or non-fiction text while following the teacher and looking at the pictures
  Talks about the pictures using the SAL
  Identifies and names objects in the pictures using the SAL
  Reads the text aloud with the teacher. The whole class reads the same story or non-fiction text with the
 teacher.
  Answers some simple questions with the support of the pictures, for example, Who, What, Where
  Learns some oral vocabulary
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups
  Recognises and reads some common words in the SAL print in the classroom, e.g. wall display.
  Acts out parts of the story using some gestures and simple language chunks in pairs and in small groups
 using simple props, masks and puppets in pairs and small groups.
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Phonological and Phonemic awareness: (oral and/or practical)
  Claps out the sounds in familiar words
  Segments spoken words into sounds and blending them together again
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Segments oral sentences into individual words by clapping on each word

 Reading: (oral and/or practical)
  Identifies and name objects in the illustrations in the Big Book/poster
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups with confidence
  Acts out parts of the story using some gestures and simple dialogue in pairs and in small groups with
 confidence and enthusiasm

 54 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 RECOMMENDED TEXTS/RESOURCES FOR THE YEAR
  Big Books (fiction) and non-fiction Big Books
  Anthology of stories, poems and songs
  Conversational Posters and pictures to support the teaching of stories and vocabulary
  Colour charts and number charts
  Objects related to the themes and topics
  Props to act out the stories and for role play, for example, masks, objects etc.
  CDs, DVDs and television programmes
  Flash card labels for classroom items and displays
  Pointers to use when reading enlarged texts, wall stories, displays
  Masks, Teacher/Learner made Big Books, Zig-zag books, puppets, flash cards etc.

CAPS 55
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.5 REQUIREMENTS GRADE 3
 3.5.1 GRADE 3 TERM 1
 GRADE 3
 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME PER WEEK: 1 HOUR
 GRADE 3 TERM 1
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Teachers should select three themes that will enable them to introduce and recycle vocabulary, and cover the
 activities listed below.

 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions.. They should make sure that they have
 the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme they have
 chosen.
 They should try to cover all the activities, more than once if possible. They should assess their learners using
 the Informal Assessment Activities. They should allow the teacher to constantly recycle simple, basic
 language structures as she communicates with the learners in the Second Additional Language.

 Weekly activities
 Two or more of the following activities in a lesson in a week:
  Continues to develop an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics
  Identifies a person, animal or object from a simple oral description, with two clues in pairs and small
 groups ‘I have two legs. I can fly. Who am I?’
  Memorises and performs simple poems and action songs in pairs and groups
  Participates in simple role-plays and dialogues with (2-3 sentences) with support of teacher modelling
 greetings and farewells etc. in pairs and small groups
  Responds to and makes simple requests, for example, ‘May I have a glass of water?’
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. ‘Excuse me; I’m sorry’)
  Talks about objects in a picture in response to the teacher’s instructions
  Plays language games as a class
  Responds physically to simple oral instructions given by teacher individually and in pairs
  Responds to simple questions asked by the teacher and learners who take the role of teacher, for
 example, ‘What, Who, Where, How

 56 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Once a week, the teacher reads or tells a story. Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures
 and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be from a Big Book or illustrated poster
 where all the children can see the pictures.
  Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time and repeats patterned
 language where appropriate in pairs and small groups
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers (Who, What, Where)

 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Through taking part in the above activities:
  continues to build and model the acquired vocabulary and language chunks in simple dialogues
  uses some formulaic language (e.g. ‘excuse me; I’m sorry’)
  responds to simple questions asked by the teacher and learners who take the role of teacher, for example,
 what, who, where, how
  understands and begins to use some simple language structures in context, for example, the modal ‘can’: I
 can jump / skip / run etc. I can touch my toes.
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)
  Demonstrates understanding of some basic oral vocabulary by pointing to objects in a picture
  Memorises and performs simple poems, action songs
  Participates in simple role-plays and dialogues with (2-3 sentences) with support of teacher modelling
 greetings and farewells etc. in pairs and small groups
  Responds to simple questions (e.g. ‘Where do you live?’)

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness, Phonemic awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and
 Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological and Phonemic Awareness
  Segments spoken words into syllables and blends them together again
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Identifies letter-sound relationships of single letters that have the same pronunciation in Home Language

CAPS 57
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 and Second Additional Language (e.g. d, f, g, h, l, m, n, s, etc.). Do at least one sound a week.
  Use syllable cards to build words (look, say and do)

 Shared Reading (at least 15 minutes twice per week)
 Twice a week, depending on the time available, the teacher tells or reads a story (Stories that are told
 can be dramatised using gestures and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be
 from a Big Book or illustrated poster where all the children can see the pictures. The teacher writes
 high frequency words from the story and puts them on the word wall.
  Listens to short stories, recounts or non-fiction texts told or read from a Big Book or illustrated poster
  Reads the text aloud with the teacher. The whole class reads the same story or non-fiction text with the
 teacher
  Follows the text read by the teacher. In subsequent readings of the same text with the teacher and peers
 reads more fluently.
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers, (Where What Who, How)
  Names some of the things in the picture in response to questions from the teacher and peers, for
 example, ‘What is this?’ ‘A fish.’
  Acts out parts of the story, using some of the dialogue in pairs and small groups
  Recognises and reads some common words in the SAL print in the classroom, e.g. wall display.
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Phonological and Phonemic awareness: (oral and/or practical)
  Segments spoken words into syllables and blending them together again
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Identifies the letter-sound relationships in familiar words in SAL and in Home Language
 Shared Reading: (oral and/or practical)
  Reads the text aloud with the teacher
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers
  Demonstrates understanding of vocabulary in the story by naming objects in the pictures in response to
 instructions from the teacher
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups
  Acts out parts of the story using some gestures and simple dialogue in pairs and in small groups

 58 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.5.2 GRADE 3 TERM 2
 GRADE 3 TERM 2
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING

 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Teachers should select three themes that will enable them to introduce and recycle vocabulary, and cover the
 activities listed below.

 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions.Teachers should choose their own
 appropriate themes depending on their context and the resources available. They should make sure
 that they have the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme
 they have chosen.
 They should try to cover all the activities, more than once if possible. They should assess their learners using
 the Informal Assessment Activities .They should allow the teacher to constantly recycle simple, basic
 language structures as she communicates with the learners in the Second Additional Language.

 Weekly activities
 Two or more of the following activities in a lesson in a week:
  Continues to develop an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics
  Memorises and performs simple poems, action songs in pairs and small groups.
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. ‘Excuse me; I’m sorry’)
  Role-plays and participates in a short conversation using some formulaic language (2-3 sentences) with
 support of teacher, e.g. meeting and greeting in pairs and small groups.
  Makes simple requests, for example, ‘May I take a book?’
  Talks about objects in a picture in response to teacher’s instructions, for example, ‘What can you see in
 the picture?’ ‘Tell me what you can see in the picture.’
  Identifies a person, animal or object from a simple oral description, with two clues in pairs and small
 groups ‘I have two legs. I can fly. Who am I?’
  Plays language games in pairs and small groups
  Responds physically to simple oral instructions given by teacher individually and in pairs
  Responds to simple questions asked by the teacher and learners who take the role of teacher, for
 example, ‘What, Who, Where, How

 Once a week, the teacher reads or tells a story. Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures
 and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be from a Big Book or illustrated poster
 where all the children can see the pictures.

CAPS 59
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time and repeats patterned
 language where appropriate in pairs and small groups
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers (Who, What, Where)
  Relate visuals to printed text

 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Through taking part in the above activities:
  Continues to build oral vocabulary
  Role-plays and participates in a short conversation using some formulaic language (2-3 sentences) with
 support of teacher.
  Begins to develop understanding and ability to use simple language structures in the context of
 meaningful spoken language, for example, understands and begins to use the modal ‘can’;: I can run;
 some negative forms: I cannot fly

 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)
  Demonstrates understanding and use of some basic oral vocabulary by naming objects
  Memorises and performs simple poems and action songs with confidence
  Responds physically to simple oral instructions given by teacher individually and in pairs
  Role-plays and participates in a short conversation using some formulaic language (2-3 sentences) with
 support of teacher, e.g. meeting and greeting in pairs and small groups.
  Responds to simple questions asked by the teacher and peers.

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness, Phonemic awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and
 Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological and Phonemic Awareness

 The activities should be integrated into Listening and Speaking activities and Shared Reading.
  Claps individual sounds (phonemes) in spoken words
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Identifies letter-sound relationships of single letters that have the same pronunciation in Home Language
 and Second Additional Language (e.g. d, f, g, h, l, m, n, s, etc.). Do at least one sound a week.
  Teach some sounds that may be different, e.g. vowels.
  Use syllable cards to build words (look, say and do)

 60 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Shared Reading (at least 15 minutes twice per week)
 Twice a week, depending on the time available, the teacher tells or reads a story (Stories that are told
 can be dramatised using gestures and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be
 from a Big Book or illustrated poster where all the children can see the pictures. The teacher writes
 high frequency words from the story and puts them on the word wall.

 Weekly activities
 The teacher could do one longer activity or two or three short ones per week.

  Listens to short stories, recounts or non-fiction texts told or read from a Big Book or illustrated poster,with
 enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time
  Reads the text aloud with the teacher. The whole class reads the same story or non-fiction text with the
 teacher
  Follows the text read by the teacher. In subsequent readings of the same text with the teacher and peers
 recognises common words and reads more fluently
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers, (Where What Who, How)
  Names some of the things in the picture in response to questions from the teacher and peers, for
 example, ‘What is this?’ ‘A fish.’
  Acts out the story using some of the dialogue in pairs and small groups
  With help from the teacher, retells parts of the story in pairs.
  Recognises and reads some common words in the SAL print in the classroom, e.g. wall display.
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Phonological and Phonemic awareness: (oral and/or practical)
  Segments spoken words into syllables and blends them together again
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Identifies the letter-sound relationships in familiar words in SAL

 Shared Reading: (oral and/or practical)
  Reads the text aloud with the teacher
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers
  Demonstrates understanding of vocabulary in the story by naming objects in the pictures in response to
 instructions from the teacher.
  After repeated readings, joins in choruses and repeats language chunks where appropriate in pairs and
 small groups
  Acts out parts of the story using some gestures and simple dialogue in pairs and in small groups

CAPS 61
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.5.3 GRADE 3 TERM 3

 GRADE 3 TERM 3
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Teachers should select three themes that will enable them to introduce and recycle vocabulary, and cover the
 activities listed below.

 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions. They should make sure that they have
 the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme they have
 chosen.
 They should try to cover all the activities, more than once if possible. They should assess their learners using
 the Informal Assessment Activities .They should allow the teacher to constantly recycle simple, basic
 language structures as she communicates with the learners in the Second Additional Language.

 Weekly activities
 The teacher could do one longer activity or two or three short ones per week
  Develops an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics
  Participates in simple role-plays and dialogues with (3 to 4 sentences) with support of teacher modelling a
 short conversation in pairs and small groups
  Follows a short sequence of 2-3 instructions given by the teacher
  Understands and responds to simple questions such as Who, What, Where, Whose?
  Makes simple requests and statements in the new language with the support of the teacher for example,
 ‘Can I go outside and play, please?’
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. Today, Tomorrow, Yesterday)
  Listens to a simple recount, given by teacher (2 sentences)
  Memorises and performs simple poems and songs in pairs and small groups with confidence and
 enthusiasm
  Plays language games outside the classroom with peers and in small groups under teacher supervision.
 Once a week, the teacher reads or tells a story. Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures
 and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be from a Big Book or illustrated poster
 where all the children can see the pictures.
  Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time and repeats patterned
 language where appropriate in pairs and small groups
  Listens and responds to a short simple story read aloud by the teacher
 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures

 62 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Through taking part in the above activities:
  continues to build and model the acquired vocabulary and language chunks in simple dialogues
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. Today, Tomorrow, Yesterday)
  Understands and responds to simple questions such as Who, What, Where, Whose?
  Begins to develop understanding and ability to use simple language structures in the context of
 meaningful spoken language, common words, question forms, personal pronouns, verbs,
 commands/imperatives
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)
  Participates in simple role-plays and dialogues with (3 to 4 sentences) with support of teacher modelling a
 short conversation/greetings in pairs and small groups
  Follows a short sequence of 2-3 instructions given by the teacher
  Gives and responds to simple instructions given by the teacher and peers e.g. Catch the ball
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. Today, Tomorrow, Yesterday)
  Understands and responds to simple questions such as Who, What, Where, Whose?
  Makes simple requests and statements in the new language with the support of the teacher for example,
 ‘Can I go outside and play, please?’

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness, Phonemic awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and
 Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonemic awareness and phonics
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Identifies the number of sounds in each syllable in familiar words
  Segments spoken words into sounds and blends them together again
  Identifies letter-sound relationships of single letters that have the same pronunciation in Home Language
 and Second Additional Language (e.g. d, f, g, h, l, m, n, s, etc.). Do at least one sound a week.
  Identifies some sounds that may be different, e.g. vowels.
  Identifies some more initial sounds which may be different in the SAL from the Home Language
  Use syllable cards to build words (look, say and do)

 Shared Reading (at least 15 minutes twice per week)

 Twice a week, depending on the time available, the teacher tells or reads a story (Stories that are told

CAPS 63
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 can be dramatised using gestures and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be
 from a Big Book or illustrated poster where all the children can see the pictures. The teacher writes
 high frequency words from the story and puts them on the word wall.

 Weekly Activities
  Listens to short stories, recounts or non-fiction texts told or read from a Big Book or illustrated poster) with
 enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time
  Reads the text aloud with the teacher. The whole class reads the same story or non-fiction text with the
 teacher
  Follows the text read by the teacher. In subsequent readings of the same text with the teacher and peers
 recognises common words and reads more fluently with expression.
  Reads fluently, the Shared reading text covered in Term 1 and 2
  Make meaning and respond to simple literal questions (Who, What, Where, How) based on Shared
 Reading text
  Names some of the things in the pictures in response to questions from the teacher and peers
  Role-plays parts of a story in small groups

  Recognises and reads some common words in the SAL print in the classroom, e.g. wall display
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Phonological and Phonemic awareness: (oral and/or practical)
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Identifies letter-sound relationships of single letters that have the same pronunciation in Home Language
 and Second Additional Language (e.g. d, f, g, h, l, m, n, s, etc)
  Knows some sounds that may be different, e.g. vowels.
  Identifies some more initial sounds which may be different in the SAL from the Home Language
  Uses syllable cards to build words (look, say and do)

 Shared Reading: (oral and/or practical)
  Reads the text aloud with the teacher fluently
  Reads fluently, the Shared reading text covered in Term 1 and 2
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers
  Demonstrates understanding of vocabulary in the story by naming words
  Role plays parts of the story using some gestures and simple dialogue in pairs and in small groups

 64 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 3.5.4 GRADE 3 TERM 4

 GRADE 3 TERM 4
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Teachers should select three themes that will enable them to introduce and recycle vocabulary, and cover the
 activities listed below.

 Note that the suggested themes/topics are simply suggestions. They should make sure that they have
 the necessary Big Books/posters, poems, songs, games and real objects for the theme they have
 chosen.
 They should try to cover all the activities, more than once if possible. They should assess their learners using
 the Informal Assessment Activities .They should allow the teacher to constantly recycle simple, basic
 language structures as she communicates with the learners in the Second Additional Language.

 Weekly activities
 The teacher could do one longer activity or two or three short ones per week
  Develops and uses an oral (listening and speaking) vocabulary using themes or topics
  Follows a short sequence of 2-3 instructions, for example, ‘Come with your friend to the front of the
 classroom’
  Participates in simple role-plays and dialogues with (3 to 4 sentences) with support of teacher modelling
 greetings/short conversation in pairs and small groups
  Takes turns to give simple instructions and commands during language games to a peer
  Understands and responds to simple questions such as ‘What is your name? How old are you?
  Makes and responds to simple requests made by the teacher and peers
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. Today, Tomorrow, Yesterday)
  Identifies and names real objects in the new language (book, pencil, shoe, shirt etc.)
  Talks about objects in a picture in response to teacher’s instructions (What can you see in the picture?
 Tell me what you can see in the picture.)
  Listens to a simple recount (2-3 sentences), given by the teacher telling about what she did
  With help from the teacher, gives a simple recount (1-2 sentences), for example, learners tell the teacher
 about the weather
  Memorises and performs simple poems, and songs with confidence and enthusiasm

 Once a week, the teacher reads or tells a story. Stories that are told can be dramatised using gestures
 and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be from a Big Book or illustrated poster
 where all the children can see the pictures.

CAPS 65
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time and repeats patterned
 language where appropriate in pairs and small groups
  Listens and responds to a short simple story read aloud by the teacher
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers (Who, What, Where)

 Development of concepts, vocabulary and language structures
 Through taking part in the above activities:
  Continues to build and model the acquired vocabulary and language chunks in simple dialogues
  Begins to develop understanding and ability to use simple language structures in the context of
 meaningful spoken language, common words, question forms, personal pronouns, plurals, verbs,
 commands/imperatives
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. ‘Today, Tomorrow, Yesterday’)
  Understands and responds to simple questions such as Who, What, Where, Whose?

 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
  Participates in simple role-plays and dialogues with (3 to 4 sentences) with support of teacher modelling a
 short conversation/greetings in pairs and small groups
  Uses some formulaic language (e.g. ‘Today, Tomorrow, Yesterday’)
  Follows a short sequence of 2-3 instructions given by the teacher
  Gives and responds to simple instructions given by the teacher and peers e.g. Catch the ball
  Understands and responds to simple questions such as Who, What, Where, Whose?
  Makes simple requests and statements in the new language with the support of the teacher for example,
 ‘Can I go outside and play, please?’

 EMERGENT LITERACY
 Phonological awareness, Phonemic awareness and Shared Reading are integrated with Listening and
 Speaking.
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
 Phonological and phonemic awareness
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Identifies the number of sounds in each syllable in familiar words
  Segments spoken words into sounds and blends them together again
  Identifies letter-sound relationships of single letters that have the same pronunciation in Home Language
 and Second Additional Language (e.g. d, f, g, h, l, m, n, s, etc.). Do at least one sound a week.
  Teach some sounds that may be different, e.g. vowels.
  Teach some more initial sounds which may be different in the SAL from the Home Language

 66 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

  Use syllable cards to build words (look, say and do)

 Shared Reading (at least 15 minutes twice per week)
 Twice a week, depending on the time available, the teacher tells or reads a story (Stories that are told
 can be dramatised using gestures and props to support meaning. Stories that are read should be
 from a Big Book or illustrated poster where all the children can see the pictures. The teacher writes
 high frequency words from the story and puts them on the word wall.
 Weekly Activities
  Listens to short stories, recounts or non-fiction texts told or read from a Big Book or illustrated poster) with
 enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time
  Reads the text aloud with the teacher. The whole class reads the same story or non-fiction text with the
 teacher
  Follows the text read by the teacher. In subsequent readings of the same text with the teacher and peers
 recognises common words and reads more fluently and with expression.
  Reads fluently, the Shared reading text covered in Term 1 and 3 in small groups
  Make meaning and respond to simple literal questions (Who, What, Where, How) based on Shared
 reading text
  Names some of the things in the picture in response to questions from the teacher and peers
  Role-plays parts of a story in small groups
  With help from the teacher, retells the story in pairs
  Recognises and reads some common words in the SAL print in the classroom, e.g. wall display
  Reads and writes some common words in SAL
 ASSESSMENT
 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
 Phonological and Phonemic awareness: (oral and/or practical)
  Identifies the sounds at the beginning and end of spoken words
  Identifies letter-sound relationships of single letters that have the same pronunciation in Home Language
 and Second Additional Language (e.g. d, f, g, h, l, m, n, s, etc.). Do at least one sound a week.
  Identifies some sounds that may be different, e.g. vowels.
  Identifies some more initial sounds which may be different in the SAL from the Home Language
  Uses syllable cards to build words (look, say and do)

 Shared Reading: (oral and/or practical)
  Reads fluently, the Shared reading text covered in Term 1 and 3
  Answers simple literal questions about a story with short answers
  Demonstrates understanding of vocabulary in the story by reading words
  Role plays parts of the story using some gestures and simple dialogue in pairs and in small groups

CAPS 67
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 RECOMMENDED TEXTS/RESOURCES FOR THE YEAR
  Pictures and conversational posters
  Big Books – both fiction and non-fiction
  Other enlarged texts (poems, songs, etc.)
  Objects related to the themes and topics, puppets, masks etc.
  Pictures to sequence
  Anthology of short stories, Poems and songs
  Language games (oral)
  Picture books with captions (caption books)
  Flash card labels for classroom items, displays and for sight words
  Alphabet charts
  Pointers to use when reading enlarged texts, wall stories, displays
  Masks, Teacher/Learner made Big Books, Zig-zag books , puppets, flash cards
  Improvised costumes for role-play and acting out the stories
  Compact discs or audio tapes with stories (read or told), poems, rhymes and songs, CD player or tape
 recorder, television and video tapes/DVDs

 68 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

GLOSSARY
action poems – poems that are accompanied by actions (e.g. I touch my head, I touch my toes, I touch my knees,
I touch my nose)

additive bilingualism – when a person learns a language (or languages) in addition to his or her home language.
The person builds on what he or she already knows in the home language (e.g. how to read and write). The
additional language builds on the home language; it does not replace it.

emergent literacy – refers to a child’s growing knowledge of the printed word. Children see print in the
environment and begin to understand its purpose. They may have stories told or read to them; they learn what
books are and how stories work. So even before they come to school they know a lot about literacy. They may try
to write their names using their own ideas about letters and spelling (i.e. emergent spelling), and they may pretend
to read a book (i.e. reading-like behaviour). This is the beginning of children’s literacy.

fluency – the ability to read a text quickly and accurately with expression that reflects understanding

formulaic language – language which is learned in chunks or wholes (e.g. greetings). When we begin to learn a
language, much of what we learn is formulaic. Gradually, we begin to make sense of the patterns and rules of the
language, and we become able to express our own ideas in very simple ways.

incidental learning – learning that happens without deliberate teaching

language chunk - Chunks are groups of words that can be found together in language. They can be words that
always go together for example “How are you? Where do you live?

Literal – the literal meaning of a text is exactly what is stated in the text. A ‘literal question’ is one which asks
learners to get information directly stated in the text (e.g. What colour was the little boy’s jersey?)

Multilingualism - is the use of two or more languages, either by an individual speaker or by a community of
speakers. The word multilingualism can be used to refer to the use or maintenance of more than one language
in a certain context. In this regard it may refer to the fact that many languages are spoken in South Africa but also
that many South Africans know more than one language.

CAPS 69
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 Orthography definition- the art of writing words with the proper letters, according to accepted usage; correct
 spelling

 phonemic awareness – the ability to hear, identify and manipulate the individual sounds of a language (e.g. in
 English to identify the same sound in ‘bad’, ‘sad’, ‘glad’ and ‘mad’, and to distinguish between the sounds in ‘bed’,
 ‘bad’, ‘bud’ and ‘bird’).

 phonics – phonics instruction teaches children the relationship between the letters (graphemes) of written
 language and the individual sounds (phonemes) of spoken language. It teaches children to use these
 relationships to read and write words.

 phonological awareness – the ability to understand how the sound system works e.g. to identify sounds,
 syllables, rhymes, onsets and rimes.

 realia - (/riˈeɪˌliˌə/ pron. ree-ay-lee-ah) are objects from real life used in by teacher to improve learner’s
 understanding of other cultures and real life situations. A teacher who teaches a new language often uses realia to
 strengthen learners associations between words for everyday objects and the objects themselves
 torecount – to tell about past events in a sequence (e.g. to say or write about what one did last weekend)

 arecount – The purpose of a recount is to tell a sequence of events (e.g. a child telling what happened at the
 weekend in the class ‘news time’). A recount uses the past tense and words like ‘first’, ‘then’ and ‘next’.

 Refrain - repetition and chorusing of patterned language in a text that is read aloud.

 rhyme – words or lines of poetry that end with the same sound including a vowel (e.g. sad, mad, glad, bad)

 shared reading – an activity in which children share the reading of an enlarged text with the teacher. This is a
 lesson with the whole class. The text used is aimed at the top group in the class. Some children will be at a
 listening level, others will be beginning to engage in the reading and more will be engaging fully. The same text is
 used over several days. Each day a new focus is selected by the teacher. The text is used to introduce text
 features, phonics, grammar and reading skills in context.

 story board – a series (or sequence) of pictures illustrating a story or procedure (e.g. how to make a mask)

 70 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

total physical response – a method of language teaching in which the teacher gives instructions, the learner
responds physically, and the teacher provides feedback.

word wall – is a literacy tool composed of an organised (typically in alphabetical order) collection of words which
are displayed in large visible letters on a wall

CAPS 71
 ENGLISH SECOND ADDITIONAL LANGUAGE GRADES 1-3

 72 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS (CAPS)