National Curriculum Statement (NCS)
ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE

 Curriculum and Assessment
 Policy Statement

 Foundation Phase
 Grades R-3

 
 
 
 
 Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement
 Grades R-3

 English home language

CAPS
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Department of Basic Education

222 Struben Street
Private Bag X895
Pretoria 0001
South Africa
Tel: +27 12 357 3000
Fax: +27 12 323 0601

120 Plein Street Private Bag X9023
Cape Town 8000
South Africa
Tel: +27 21 465 1701
Fax: +27 21 461 8110
Website: http://www.education.gov.za

© 2011 Department of Basic Education

Isbn: 978-1-4315-0400-8

Design and Layout by: Ndabase Printing Solution

Printed by: Government Printing Works

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGEGRADES
 GRADES10-12
 R-3
FOREWORD by thE ministER

 Our national curriculum is the culmination of our efforts over a period of seventeen
 years to transform the curriculum bequeathed to us by apartheid. From the start of
 democracy we have built our curriculum on the values that inspired our Constitution
 (Act 108 of 1996). the Preamble to the Constitution states that the aims of the
 Constitution are to:

 • heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic
 values, social justice and fundamental human rights;

 • improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person;

 • lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is
 based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by law;
 and

• build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of
 nations.

Education and the curriculum have an important role to play in realising these aims.

in 1997 we introduced outcomes-based education to overcome the curricular divisions of the past, but the experience
of implementation prompted a review in 2000. This led to the first curriculum revision: the Revised National Curriculum
Statement Grades R-9 and the National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 (2002).

Ongoing implementation challenges resulted in another review in 2009 and we revised the Revised National
Curriculum Statement (2002) to produce this document.

From 2012 the two 2002 curricula, for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12 respectively, are combined in a single document
and will simply be known as the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. the National Curriculum Statement for
Grades R-12 builds on the previous curriculum but also updates it and aims to provide clearer specification of what
is to be taught and learnt on a term-by-term basis.

the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 accordingly replaces the subject statements, Learning Programme
Guidelines and subject Assessment Guidelines with the

(a) Curriculum and Assessment Policy statements (CAPs) for all approved subjects listed in this document;

(b) National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National Curriculum Statement
 Grades R-12; and

(c) National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12.

MRS ANGIE MOTSHEKGA, MP
MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION

CAPS
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
CONTENTS

Section 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENTS. . 3

1.1 Background......................................................................................................................................................3

1.2 Overview .......................................................................................................................................................3

1.3 General aims of the South African curriculum. ............................................................................................4

1.4 Time allocation.................................................................................................................................................6

 1.4.1 Foundation Phase....................................................................................................................................6

 1.4.2 Intermediate Phase..................................................................................................................................6

 1.4.3 Senior Phase...........................................................................................................................................7

 1.4.4 Grades 10-12...........................................................................................................................................7

Section 2: INTRODUCING THE LANGUAGES. .................................................................................... 8

2.1 Home Language Grades R-3 introduction.....................................................................................................8

2.2 An integrated approach...................................................................................................................................8

2.3 Time allocation...............................................................................................................................................10

2.4 Assessment....................................................................................................................................................10

2.5 Listening and speaking.................................................................................................................................10

2.6 Reading and writing focus time.................................................................................................................... 11

2.7 Writing.............................................................................................................................................................18

2.8 Grade R...........................................................................................................................................................20

Section 3: Content and Teaching Plans for Language Skills...................................... 22

3.1 Grade R Home language: English................................................................................................................31

3.2 Grade 1 Home language: English.................................................................................................................53

3.3 Grade 2 Home language: English.................................................................................................................80

3.4 Grade 3 Home language: English...............................................................................................................105

Glossary............................................................................................................................................ 131

CAPS 1
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 2 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
sECTION 1

INTRODUCTION TO THE Curriculum and Assessment Policy StatementS for ENGLISH
HOME LANGUAGE gradeS R-3

1.1 Background

The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (NCS) stipulates policy on curriculum and assessment in the
schooling sector.

To improve implementation, the National Curriculum Statement was amended, with the amendments coming into
effect in January 2012. A single comprehensive Curriculum and Assessment Policy document was developed for
each subject to replace Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment Guidelines
in Grades R-12.

1.2 Overview

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) represents a policy statement for learning
 and teaching in South African schools and comprises the following:

 (i) Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements for each approved school subject;

 (ii) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (iii) The policy document, National Protocol for Assessment Grades R-12 (January 2012).

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January 2012) replaces the two current national curricula
 statements, namely the

 (i) Revised National Curriculum Statement Grades R-9, Government Gazette No. 23406 of 31 May 2002,
 and

 (ii) National Curriculum Statement Grades 10-12 Government Gazettes, No. 25545 of 6 October 2003 and
 No. 27594 of 17 May 2005.

(c) The national curriculum statements contemplated in subparagraphs b(i) and (ii) comprise the following policy
 documents which will be incrementally repealed by the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 (January
 2012) during the period 2012-2014:

 (i) The Learning Area/Subject Statements, Learning Programme Guidelines and Subject Assessment
 Guidelines for Grades R-9 and Grades 10-12;

 (ii) The policy document, National Policy on assessment and qualifications for schools in the General
 Education and Training Band d, promulgated in Government Notice No. 124 in Government Gazette
 No. 29626 of 12 February 2007;

 (iii) The policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A qualification at Level 4 on the National
 Qualifications Framework (NQF), promulgated in Government Gazette No.27819 of 20 July 2005;

CAPS 3
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 (iv) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding learners with special
 needs, published in Government Gazette, No.29466 of 11 December 2006, is incorporated in the policy
 document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12; and

 (v) The policy document, An addendum to the policy document, the National Senior Certificate: A
 qualification at Level 4 on the National Qualifications Framework (NQF), regarding the National Protocol
 for Assessment (Grades R-12), promulgated in Government Notice No.1267 in Government Gazette
 No. 29467 of 11 December 2006.=

(d) The policy document, National policy pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of the
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, and the sections on the Curriculum and Assessment Policy as
 contemplated in Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this document constitute the norms and standards of the National
 Curriculum Statement Grades R-12. It will therefore, in terms of section 6A of the South African Schools Act,
 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996,) form the basis for the Minister of Basic Education to determine minimum outcomes
 and standards, as well as the processes and procedures for the assessment of learner achievement to be
 applicable to public and independent schools.

1.3 General aims of the South African Curriculum

(a) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 gives expression to the knowledge, skills and values worth
 learning in South African schools. This curriculum aims to ensure that children acquire and apply knowledge
 and skills in ways that are meaningful to their own lives. In this regard, the curriculum promotes knowledge in
 local contexts, while being sensitive to global imperatives.

(b) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 serves the purposes of:

 • equipping learners, irrespective of their socio-economic background, race, gender, physical ability or
 intellectual ability, with the knowledge, skills and values necessary for self-fulfilment, and meaningful
 participation in society as citizens of a free country;

 • providing access to higher education;

 • facilitating the transition of learners from education institutions to the workplace; and

 • providing employers with a sufficient profile of a learner’s competences.

(c) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is based on the following principles:

 • Social transformation: ensuring that the educational imbalances of the past are redressed, and that equal
 educational opportunities are provided for all sections of the population;

 • Active and critical learning: encouraging an active and critical approach to learning, rather than rote and
 uncritical learning of given truths;

 • High knowledge and high skills: the minimum standards of knowledge and skills to be achieved at each
 grade are specified and set high, achievable standards in all subjects;

 • Progression: content and context of each grade shows progression from simple to complex;

 4 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 • Human rights, inclusivity, environmental and social justice: infusing the principles and practices of social and
 environmental justice and human rights as defined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. The
 National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 is sensitive to issues of diversity such as poverty, inequality,
 race, gender, language, age, disability and other factors;

 • Valuing indigenous knowledge systems: acknowledging the rich history and heritage of this country as
 important contributors to nurturing the values contained in the Constitution; and

 • Credibility, quality and efficiency: providing an education that is comparable in quality, breadth and depth to
 those of other countries.

(d) The National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12 aims to produce learners that are able to:

 • identify and solve problems and make decisions using critical and creative thinking;

 • work effectively as individuals and with others as members of a team;

 • organise and manage themselves and their activities responsibly and effectively;

 • collect, analyse, organise and critically evaluate information;

 • communicate effectively using visual, symbolic and/or language skills in various modes;

 • use science and technology effectively and critically showing responsibility towards the environment and
 the health of others; and

 • demonstrate an understanding of the world as a set of related systems by recognising that problem solving
 contexts do not exist in isolation.

(e) Inclusivity should become a central part of the organisation, planning and teaching at each school. This can
 only happen if all teachers have a sound understanding of how to recognise and address barriers to learning,
 and how to plan for diversity.

 The key to managing inclusivity is ensuring that barriers are identified and addressed by all the relevant support
 structures within the school community, including teachers, District-Based Support Teams, Institutional-Level
 Support Teams, parents and Special Schools as Resource Centres. To address barriers in the classroom,
 teachers should use various curriculum differentiation strategies such as those included in the Department of
 Basic Education’s Guidelines for Inclusive Teaching and Learning (2010).

CAPS 5
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
1.4 Time Allocation

1.4.1 Foundation Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Foundation Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT GRADE R GRADES 1-2 GRADE 3
 (HOURS) (HOURS) (HOURS)
 Home Language 10 8/7 8/7
 First Additional Language 2/3 3/4
 Mathematics 7 7 7
 Life Skills 6 6 7

 • Beginning Knowledge (1) (1) (2)

 • Creative Arts (2) (2) (2)

 • Physical Education (2) (2) (2)

 • Personal and Social Well-being (1) (1) (1)
 TOTAL 23 23 25

(b) Instructional time for Grades R, 1 and 2 is 23 hours and for Grade 3 is 25 hours.

(c) Ten hours are allocated for languages in Grades R-2 and 11 hours in Grade 3. A maximum of 8 hours and a
 minimum of 7 hours are allocated for Home Language and a minimum of 2 hours and a maximum of 3 hours for
 Additional Language in Grades 1-2. In Grade 3 a maximum of 8 hours and a minimum of 7 hours are allocated
 for Home Language and a minimum of 3 hours and a maximum of 4 hours for First Additional Language.

(d) In Life Skills Beginning Knowledge is allocated 1 hour in Grades R-2 and 2 hours as indicated by the hours in
 brackets for Grade 3.

1.4.2 Intermediate Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Intermediate Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 6
 First Additional Language 5
 Mathematics 6
 Natural Sciences and Technology 3,5
 Social Sciences 3
 Life Skills 4

 • Creative Arts (1,5)

 • Physical Education (1)

 • Personal and Social Well-being (1,5)
 TOTAL 27,5

 6 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
1.4.3 Senior Phase

(a) The instructional time in the Senior Phase is as follows:

 SUBJECT HOURS
 Home Language 5
 First Additional Language 4
 Mathematics 4,5
 Natural Sciences 3
 Social Sciences 3
 Technology 2
 Economic Management Sciences 2
 Life Orientation 2
 Creative Arts 2
 TOTAL 27,5

1.4.4 Grades 10-12

(a) The instructional time in Grades 10-12 is as follows:

 Subject Time allocation per week (hours)
 Home Language 4.5
 First Additional Language 4.5
 Mathematics 4.5
 Life Orientation 2
 A minimum of any three subjects selected from Group B 12 (3x4h)
 Annexure B, Tables B1-B8 of the policy document, National policy
 pertaining to the programme and promotion requirements of
 the National Curriculum Statement Grades R-12, subject to the
 provisos stipulated in paragraph 28 of the said policy document.
 TOTAL 27,5

 The allocated time per week may be utilised only for the minimum required NCS subjects as specified above,
 and may not be used for any additional subjects added to the list of minimum subjects. Should a learner wish
 to offer additional subjects, additional time must be allocated for the offering of these subjects.

CAPS 7
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
SECTION 2

NTRODUCING THE LANGUAGES

2.1 Home Language Grades R-3 introduction

In the Foundation Phase, the skills in the Home Language curriculum are:

 Listening and speaking Thinking and Reasoning and Language Structure and Use
 Reading and phonics which are integrated into all four language skills (listening,
 Writing and handwriting speaking, reading and writing)

The content (knowledge, concepts and skills) contained in the National Curriculum Statement (NCS) has been
organised in the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS), per term, using these headings. This CAPS
provides teachers with:

• an introduction containing guidelines on how to use the Foundation Phase document

• content, concepts and skills to be taught per term

• guidelines for time allocation

• requirements for the Formal Assessment Activities and suggestions for informal assessment

• lists of recommended resources per grade.

2.2 AN INTEGRATED APPROACH

The Languages programme is integrated into all other subject areas. Language is used across the curriculum in
all oral work, reading and writing. Many of the Listening and Speaking Language skills will be developed within
Mathematics and Life Skills, which is made up of many subjects such as Creative Arts and Beginning Knowledge
including Personal and Social Well-being, Natural Sciences and Technology and the Social Sciences. Themes and
topics can be selected from these subject areas to provide contexts for the teaching of language skills.

2.3 TIME ALLOCATION

The following time allocations for languages come into effect in 2012. For Language in the Foundation Phase time
will be determined by the language context of the school. Schools can choose whether to give relatively more or less
time to the Home and First Additional Languages depending on the needs of their learners. The minimum time for the
Home Language and First Additional Languages is provided in brackets in the table below.

 Home Language First Additional Language
 Grade R 10 hours
 Grade 1 8 (7) hours 3 (2) hours
 Grade 2 8 (7) hours 3 (2) hours
 Grade 3 8 (7) hours 4 (3) hours

 8 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
The Department does not prescribe how to break down the minimum time into the different components although
the following suggestions are made for each grade.

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE Total per week
 Listening & speaking 15 minutes per day for 3 days 45 minutes
 Reading & Phonics Phonics: 15 minutes per day for 5 days (1 hour 15 minutes) 4 hours 30minutes
 Shared Reading: 15 minutes per day for 3 days
 (45 minutes)
 Group Reading: 30 minutes per day (2 groups each for 15
 minutes) for 5 days (2 hour 30 minutes)
 Handwriting 15 minutes per day for 4 days 1 hour
 Writing 15 minutes per day for 3 days 45 minutes
 Total per week 7 hours

 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE Total per week
 Listening & speaking 15 minutes per day for 3 days 45 minutes
 Reading & phonics Phonics: 15 minutes per day for 5 days (1 hour) 4 hours 30 minutes
 Shared Reading: 20 minutes per day for 3 days
 (1 hour)
 Group Reading: 30 minutes per day (2 groups each for 15
 minutes) for 5 days (2 hours 30 minutes)
 Handwriting 15 minutes per day for 3 days 45 minutes
 Writing 15 minutes per day for 4 days 1 hour
 Total per week 7 hours

 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE Total per week
 Listening & speaking 15 minutes per day for 3 days 45 minutes
 Reading & Phonics Phonics 15 minutes per day for 4 days (1 hour) 4 hours 30 minutes
 Shared Reading 20 minutes per day for 3 days
 (1 hour)
 Group Reading 30 minutes per day (2 groups each for 15 minutes)
 for 5 days (2 hours 30 minutes)
 Handwriting 15 minutes per day for 3 days 45 minutes
 Writing 20 minutes per day for 3 days 1 hour
 Total per week 7 hours

The Department does not prescribe how to break down the maximum time into the different components although
the following suggestions are made for each grade.

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE Total per week
 Listening & speaking 15 minutes per day for 4 days 1 hour
 Reading & Phonics Phonics: 15 minutes per day for 5 days (1 hour 15 minutes) 5 hours
 Shared Reading/Shared Writing: 15 minutes per day for 5 days
 (1 hour 15 minutes)
 Group Reading: 30 minutes per day (2 groups each for 15 minutes)
 for 5 days (2 hour 30 minutes)
 Handwriting 15 minutes per day for 4 days 1 hour
 Writing 20 minutes per day for 3 days 1 hour
 Total per week 8 hours

CAPS 9
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE Total per week
 Listening & speaking 15 minutes per day for 4 days 1 hour
 Reading & phonics Phonics: 15 minutes per day for 5 days (1 hour 15 minutes) 5 hours
 Shared Reading/Shared Writing: 15 minutes per day for 5 days
 (1 hour 15 minutes)
 Group Reading: 30 minutes per day (2 groups each for 15 minutes)
 for 5 days (2 hour 30 minutes)
 Handwriting 15 minutes per day for 4 days 1 hour
 Writing 20 minutes per day for 3 days 1 hour
 Total per week 8 hours

 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE Total per week
 Listening & speaking 15 minutes per day for 4 days 1 hour
 Reading & phonics Phonics: 15 minutes per day for 5 days (1 hour 15 minutes) 5 hours
 Shared Reading/Shared Writing: 15 minutes per day for 5 days
 (1 hour 15 minutes)
 Group Reading: 30 minutes per day (2 groups each for 15 minutes)
 for 5 days (2 hour 30 minutes)
 Handwriting 15 minutes per day for 4 days 1 hour
 Writing 20 minutes per day for 3 days 1 hour
 Total per week 8 hours

2.4 ASSESSMENT

The CAPS document provides the requirements for each Formal Assessment Activity.

 GRADE SUBJECT TERM 1 TERM 2 TERM 3 TERM 4 TOTAL
 1 Home Language 1 2 2 2 7
 2 Home Language 1 2 2 2 7
 3 Home Language 1 3 3 2 9

In Term 1 there is only one Formal Assessment Task (made up of a number of parts dealing with different aspects of
Language) in Grades 1-3. Schools are encouraged to conduct a baseline assessment in the first term. In addition,
suggestions are given for informal assessment that will inform daily teaching and learning but will not be formally
recorded.

2.5 LISTENING AND SPEAKING

Children are constantly developing their listening and speaking skills not only in each of the components of Language
but also during other subjects. Because listening and speaking are crucial to all learning, it is important that these skills
are effectively developed early in a child’s academic life. Hence, in the Foundation Phase, there is time specifically
dedicated to the development of these two important skills.

The time allocation for Listening and Speaking provides for (1) the time spent at the beginning of the day and (2)
focussed listening and speaking activities.

 10 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
2.5.1 Oral work at the beginning of the day

Each morning should begin with a brief whole class oral activity with children. Use this time to:

• Talk about the day, date, the weather chart, children who have birthdays and any special events for the day.

• Check attendance: take a roll call to identify children present / absent

• Hear a few children share their news, ‘show and tell’ about a picture or object, talk about the diary, sports,
 concerts, topical events and story-telling. Try to listen to every child’s news at least once every two weeks.

2.5.2 Focussed activities

Specific attention should be given to listening and speaking skills throughout the Foundation Phase. The time
allocated to Oral includes Listening and Speaking Activities that target specific skills at least twice a week. The
CAPS document thus provides (1) daily/weekly listening and speaking skills and (2) a list of other essential listening
and speaking skills. This division helps teachers to plan their teaching so that their focussed listening and speaking
lessons concentrate on developing 2 - 3 specific skills at a time. These focussed activities should be integrated with
Drama which is part of Creative Arts in Life Skills.

2.6 READING AND WRITING FOCUS TIME

In Grades 1-3, Reading and Writing take place in Reading and Writing Focus Time. It is here, through clear, focussed
lessons that children will be taught to be effective readers and writers. Time every day must be set aside for focussed
lessons covering reading (Shared Reading, Group Guided Reading, Paired and Independent Reading, Phonics) and
writing (Shared Writing, Group Writing and Individual Writing, grammar and spelling activities). During this time the
teacher does group guided reading with two groups while other children are busy with consolidation activities such
as written comprehension, phonics, spelling, grammar and writing. Paired / independent reading can also take place
at the same time.

The Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statement (CAPS) for the Foundation Phase divides the requirements
for Reading into:

• Shared Reading (including Shared Writing)

• Group Guided Reading

• Paired / Independent Reading

• Phonics (including Phonemic Awareness)

2.6.1 Shared Reading

Shared Reading (and/or Shared Writing) usually happens in the first 15 minutes of the Reading and Writing Focus
Time. The teacher works with the whole class. Shared Reading will happen on two to four days a week using a single,
enlarged text for the whole class such as Big Books, posters and pictures or a text on an overhead transparency or
individual fiction and non-fiction texts for each child. Although there will normally be only one text used per week,
the texts selected for each grade should increase in length and complexity across the year and across the grades.
Children will be introduced to a range of stories, poems, rhymes and plays as well as information and graphical texts.

CAPS 11
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Each Shared Reading session will have a learning focus from the following: concepts of print, text features, phonics,
language patterns, word identification strategies and comprehension at a range of levels (e.g. literal, reorganization,
inferential, evaluation and appreciation questions). The first session focuses on the enjoyment and first ‘look’ at the
text, with the children giving a personal response to the text. In the next session the same text is used and the focus
shifts to more involvement in the reading with the teacher using the discussions that take place to develop vocabulary,
comprehension, decoding skills and text structures (grammar, punctuation etc). On the third, and possibly the fourth
day, children read the text themselves and engage in oral, practical and written activities based on the text. Some
texts might only be used over a day or two, especially in Grade 2 and Grade 3.

2.6.2 Shared Writing

Where possible, the Shared Reading text should inform the Shared Writing where the teacher models how to write
a text. Children engage in the composition of the text while the teacher takes on the role of facilitator and scribe.
The Shared Reading text can be consulted to provide examples of language patterns, spelling choices or other text
features useful in the preparation of new texts. This modelling of the writing process helps to prepare children for their
own writing tasks. Shared Reading and Shared Writing should take place in Grades 1-3.

2.6.3 Group, Guided Reading

This is an ability-group reading teaching strategy where all the members in the group read the same text under
the direction of the teacher and should take place every day. Guided reading involves the teacher in a session with
a group of between 6 and 10 children. The teacher plans the lessons to include a range of word-attack strategies
that children will learn to apply when meeting challenges in texts. The ‘text talk’ between teacher and children (and
children with each other) is central to this approach. During this time the teacher should not be interrupted by other
children who are doing independent activities. Each group session should be between 10 and 15 minutes long with
two groups reading with the teacher every day (approximately half an hour per day in total).

2.6.4 Forming ability groups

Texts are selected according to the group’s instructional reading level. The easiest way of establishing this level and
dividing children into groups is through observation of the readers as they read a text. Here is a list of observable
behaviour that will help in grouping children for Guided Reading sessions.

• The text must be read with ease but still have a few challenges for the reader either at a decoding or at the
 comprehension level. The reader should recognise and quickly decode 90% - 95% of the words. They should
 all finish reading the selection within a minute of each other.

• They will read fluently and with appropriate expression

• They will be interested in the text

• They will not need to finger-point while reading

• They will read silently

 12 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Steps in a Group Guided Reading Lesson

 I. Select an appropriate text:

 Graded readers will mostly be used for group reading. They should be at a lower level than the texts used for
 Shared Reading. Read through the text beforehand and note any features of structure, vocabulary or syntax
 that may be challenging for the children. These may provide the teacher with a teaching focus.

 II. Introduction:

 Introduce the type of book or chapter for the session and introduce the topic. Assist the children to make
 connections with the topic and their own life experiences. Keep this ‘talk’ focused and just enough for the
 children to read successfully (2 - 3 minutes).

 III. Picture Talk or Browsing:

 With very young children briefly talk through the illustrations of the book or the chapter pointing out significant
 details and raising questions about what might be happening at this point in the text. With older children teach
 them to browse through the text paying attention to captions, chapter headings and any other organisational
 features such as table of contents and/or sub-headings within the text. Where new or difficult words appear in
 the text, the teacher introduces these words in the ‘text talk’, prior to the children reading the text themselves.
 This should last for 2 - 3 minutes.

 IV. First Reading:

 Children read the text individually. The very early readers can read aloud or ‘whisper read’ the text, while
 more experienced readers read silently until the teacher asks them to read out loud. The teacher observes
 the children’s reading behaviours and may select an additional teaching focus based on these observations.
 The teacher moves from child to child and listens to each read a small section of the text aloud. The teacher
 prompts the children at this stage by saying, e.g.:

 • What do you expect to read in this book?

 • Does that make sense to you?

 • Well done! You corrected yourself. That makes sense.

 • What would sound right in this sentence?

 • Look at the illustration.

 • It could be but look at the first letter again.

 V. Discussion:

 If children raised questions in the picture talk stage, return to these questions and discuss the answers. The
 discussion could also include a focus on phonics, comprehension or on an aspect of grammar. Discuss the text
 bearing in mind the range of questions that should be integrated into the discussion to develop comprehension.

CAPS 13
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 VI. Second and subsequent readings:

 On subsequent days children re-read the text either in pairs or alone. The prime focus here is to develop
 fluency and provide opportunities to use the text to develop vocabulary, grammar and deeper comprehension
 of the text. Vary the manner in which this is done, e.g., reading parts of a character or taking turns to read a
 page or paragraph. Older, more experienced readers may select a particular passage to work on in this time.

Paired and Independent Reading

Paired and Independent Reading provides children with reading practice and encourages reading for enjoyment.

Children can reread their class or group readers, or they can read simple ‘fun’ books or supplementary readers. The
text should be at a lower level than that used for Shared and Group Guided Reading. Paired reading can take place
at any time, anywhere, as a class reading activity. Children can sit in pairs inside or outside of the classroom to read
together or take turns to read or two children who have completed their tasks can read together while other children
complete their work.

If children read books on their own they also develop fluency, provided that the books are easy enough for the
children to read without help. Short, simple books with predictable text and colourful illustrations are ideal. Some
teachers like to give children individual reading to do at home. This home reading should consist of re-reading the
group reading book or reading simple, ‘fun’ books. This extra reading practice, done on a regular basis every day,
plays an important role in learning to read.

The five components of teaching reading

Most reading experts agree that there are five main components to the teaching of reading:

• Phonemic awareness

• Word recognition (sight words and phonics)

• Comprehension

• Vocabulary

• Fluency

Each of these components needs to be taught explicitly and practised on a daily basis.

Phonemic awareness

Phonemic awareness is recognising that speech consists of a sequence of sounds and being able to recognise these
individual sounds, how they make words and how these words can make sentences. Developing this awareness
should begin early in Grade 1.

A sequence for the teaching of phonemic awareness could be:

• Activities that focus on rhyme (e.g. What rhymes with cow?)

• Activities that focus on syllable units (e.g. Clap for your name, e.g. Pau - la)

 14 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
• Activities that focus on onset (the part before the vowel) and rime (the vowel(s) + the consonant(s) that follow)
 (e.g. St + and, br + own).

• Activities that focus on phonemes: Put these sounds together: /st/-/o/-/p/

• Matching activities: Do these start the same? Sandwich/sandbag

• Isolation activities: What do you hear at the beginning of black?

• Substitution activities: What word would you have if you replaced /st/ in stool with /f/?

• Blending activities: Which word would you have if you put these sounds together:

 - /str/ā/n/ (blending phonemes)

 - /str/ain/ (blending onset and rime)

 - /mu/mmy/ (blending syllables)

• Segmentation activities: Say the parts you hear in this word:

 - Stable: /stā-/ble/ (separating syllables)

 - Dog: /d/-/o/-/g/ (separating phonemes)

• Deletion activities

 - Say stirfry without the stir (syllable deletion)

 - Say friend without the /fr/ (onset deletion)

 - Say Pete without the /p/ (phoneme deletion)

Useful activities to develop basic skills such as listening include listening games, nursery rhymes, rhyming games
and games using alliteration (words that begin with the same sound).

Phonics

Phonics refers to the sounds in words and the symbols (letters of the alphabet) used to represent them. It is an
important tool in both reading and writing.

There are a range of phonic programmes available. Schools may select the programme that will support explicit
and systematic teaching of phonics through the school. Schools should remain loyal to their chosen programme.
The suggested sequence of introducing the phonic elements in the CAPS document is a guide. Where phonic
programmes have different sequences, follow these instead. However, the pacing of introducing the phonic elements
should be similar to the pacing in the CAPS document.

Phonics and handwriting should be linked as the teaching of the letter sound and how to write it go together. Teach
the more frequently used sounds first in Grade 1. Also bear in mind letter formation so that, for example, one might
choose to teach the letter c before a and the letter l before h and b. The CAPS document paces the introduction of
phonics so that 1-2 new sounds are introduced each week during the first two terms so that at least eight sounds
are taught by the end of the first term and the remainder by the end of the second term. Some consonant and vowel

CAPS 15
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
combinations can be introduced in the second half of Grade 1. At the same time continue practice in building and
breaking down words.

In Grade 2 and Grade 3 more consonant and vowel combinations are taught, increasing in complexity over the year
and across the two grades. The teaching of phonics is not an isolated activity and should be linked to the Shared
Reading programme.

As children are learning the sound symbol system of the language taught, they should be encouraged to use ‘invented
spelling’ until such time that they learn conventional spellings. Children who use ‘invented spelling’ become better
spellers than those who do not. Strive for the children to write with phonemic accuracy where each sound in a word
is represented in writing such as ‘becors’ or ‘stashun’.

Spelling is closely linked to phonics and the spelling programme should be informed by the phonics taught during
that week. Whilst the teaching of spelling will be informal during Grades 1 and 2, in Grade 3 a more formal spelling
programme should be implemented with periodic, informal spelling tests and dictations. However, correct spelling
needs to be evident in children’s written work and not only in spelling tests and dictations.

Word Recognition

Sight words (or ‘look and say’ words) involve the child recognising an individual word ‘on sight’ through the use of
continued repetition of a word. Words that appear frequently in text (high frequency words) can be learnt in this way.
English, unlike many languages, contains a large percentage of irregular words,that is, words that are not spelt as
they sound so there is a strong argument for teaching sight words in English.

Use the Shared Reading and Group Guided Reading lessons to model the following five finger strategy where
each finger represents a strategy the reader can use to systematically figure out how to read an unknown word and
its meaning:

• The thumb: Leave the word out and read to the end of the sentence.

• The first finger: Look at the picture

• The second finger: Look at the word and to see if any parts of the word are known.

• The third finger: Sound the word out

• The fourth finger: Ask for help in reading the word or understanding its meaning

 Start teaching children this process when they meet unknown words.

Comprehension:

During the reading lessons the teacher has many opportunities to engage children in a range of levels of thinking
and questioning. Here are a few ways of starting questions that will help to develop both lower and higher order
comprehension skills.

Literal comprehension

• Identify…. (e.g. Identify the main character in the story.)

• Point out… (e.g. Point out the car the robber was driving.)

 16 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
• Read/quote the line that… (e.g. Read the line that tells you the grandmother was unhappy.)

• Describe… (e.g. Describe the villain of the story.)

• Find… (e.g. Find the name of the book she was reading.)

• Show … (e.g. Show me the part of the story you liked best.)

• Locate … (e.g. Locate the place the family was driving to in the story.)

• State… (e.g. State the name of the little black dog that ran away.)

Reorganisation

• Compare…. (e.g. Compare the two sisters. What was different?)

• List …. (e.g. List the places the grandfather visited.)

• Contrast… (e.g. Contrast the place where they were living with their new home.)

• Divide….into…. (e.g. Divide the different animals in the story into two groups, those that were kind to the girl
 and those that tried to eat her.)

• Classify… (e.g. Classify the animals in the story.)

• Summarise… (e.g. Summarise the story in not more than four sentences.)

• How is….different to… (e.g. How is the hero different from the villain?)

Inferential

• Pretend… (e.g. Pretend you were the hero. What would you have done?)

• Suppose… (e.g. Suppose the zookeeper had left the cage door open. What would have happened?)

• Could…. (e.g. Could the man have reached the other side of the river a different way?)

• What are the implications … (e.g. What happened because of that decision?)

• What might have happened if…. (e.g. What might have happened if his father had gone to see his uncle?)

• What consequences…. (e.g. What were the consequences of her actions?)

Evaluation

• Should… (e.g. Should her grandmother have told her the story?)

• In your opinion… (e.g. In your opinion was the boy right to behave that way?)

• Do you agree… (e.g. Do you agree that leaving home was the best choice?)

• Would you have… (e.g. Would you have done the same thing if you were in that position?

CAPS 17
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
• Is it right that… (e.g. Is it right that his uncle threw him out of the house because he stole some bread?)

• What best describes… (e.g. What best describes the main character in the story?)

Appreciation

• What did you think when… (e.g. What did you think would happen when the lion opened his mouth?)

• Is this word/phrase effective for… (e.g. Is this word a good word to describe the villain?)

• Do you know anyone like… (e.g. Do you know anyone who behaves like his sister?)

• Why did you like/dislike… (e.g. Why did you dislike her uncle?)

Work also on meta-cognitive skills to teach children to monitor themselves when reading, both in the area of word
recognition and comprehension. Children should be taught to ask: ‘Does it sound right?’, ‘Does it look right?’ and
‘Does it make sense?’ Model the process in Shared Reading and apply it in Guided Reading with support.

Reading fluency

Fluency in reading involves:

• Accuracy in decoding: being able to accurately identify the majority of words

• The rate or speed of reading: immediately recognising words or being able to get the words off the page quickly
 and effortlessly

• Reading smoothly with appropriate phrasing and expression

• Comprehension

Fluency levels can be improved by teaching specific reading skills for decoding and word recognition, by selecting
simpler texts, by providing more interesting texts, by rereading books and by increasing the volume of texts read.

“Read alouds” by the teacher

A final and vital component of a balanced reading programme is the reading aloud (story-time) by the teacher. This
develops a whole range of language skills (including those of reading) in a meaningful context and is at the heart of
a balanced programme for literacy. Through “read alouds” teachers can create in children a love of reading and a
passion for stories.

 More information on all aspects of the teaching of reading can be found in the Department of Basic Education’s handbook,
 Teaching Reading in the Early Grades. (2008).

2.7 WRITING

Children begin Grade 1 by ‘writing’ using pictures but as they master the skills of letter formation they can start to copy
individual words, captions and full sentences which they can then illustrate. By the middle of Grade 1 children should
be able to write their own captions for their pictures and construct at least one sentence. Give support by providing
sentence starters or frames, e.g., ‘I want…’. Give each child an A5 book to use as a personal dictionary. Provide cloze
procedure exercises in which children complete a sentence by adding a word and simple questions that children can
answer with Yes/No or a single word.

 18 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
The Shared Writing activities model the writing process so that children understand how individual letters form a
word, how separate words form a sentence, the importance of spaces between words and the use of punctuation.
Through Shared Writing children develop an extended vocabulary and come to understand how sentences can
be enriched by the use of interesting adjectives and adverbs. As children become more skilled in writing their own
sentences, introduce the concept of paragraphs.

The CAPS uses the process approach to writing. The process involves children in drafting, writing, editing and
presenting text for others to read. Foundation Phase children will not rewrite their work, but rather edit by drawing a
line through unwanted words and adding text where necessary.

Handwriting

The CAPS document makes provision for the systematic teaching of the skills of handwriting, in short periods in the
various grade levels, for approximately 15 minutes per day.

Pre-writing programme

Before starting to teach formal handwriting in Grade 1, children should follow a pre-writing programme to develop
visual discrimination, gross and fine motor and hand-eye coordination, body image etc. They need to be taught the
correct pencil grip, how to form the letters, the starting point, size, shape, and direction of movement. Later guide
children to position and space letters on and between the lines. The correct sitting position is also important. Young
children often have difficulty in copying from the board as their eyes need time to refocus from the board to the page
in front of them and their short-term visual memory may not be well developed. It helps to give children in Grades 1-3
writing strips containing a row of letters for the children to copy during Handwriting.

Transition to a joined script or cursive writing

By the end of Grade 1 children should be able to form all the lower and upper case letters correctly and fluently and
copy sentences correctly from the board or from sentence strips. In Grade 2 children develop greater speed in writing
print script and it is in this grade that most schools will begin teaching a joined script or cursive writing. Whilst the
choice in regard to the handwriting script remains with a school/province children should be taught to write a form of
joined script or cursive writing by the end of Grade 3. Most children make the transition to this script during the first
half of Grade 3.

Materials

In Grade 1 children begin by writing on blank paper using wax crayons. In time they progress to writing on 17mm lines
using pencils for formal handwriting lessons, although many schools prefer to continue using blank jotters for other
written work even in Grade 2. By Grade 3 children make the transition to using 8.5mm lined books. The exact time
for these transitions will depend on the level of the children and the school’s policy.

Barriers to learning

The Language periods should provide opportunities to support children with barriers to learning, enrichment for
those who are doing well, assessment activities and time to write. Written work must be marked and overseen by the
teacher so that progress of each individual child can be tracked, monitored and can be used to inform the next steps
to be taken in the learning pathway. Read aloud to the children daily to ensure vocabulary growth and development.

CAPS 19
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
2.8 GRADE R

The Grade R organisation of language learning is based on principles of integration and play-based learning. The
teacher should be pro-active, a mediator rather than a facilitator. A mediator makes the most of incidental learning
opportunities that arise spontaneously through a range of child-centred activities, such as free-play in the fantasy
corner or block construction site, and teacher-directed activities such as a story ‘ring’ or other ‘rings’. Issues relating
to language as well as social, emotional and other forms of development such as fine and gross motor present
themselves naturally in the routines and activities of a quality Grade R daily schedule. All these settings could provide
opportunities for a teacher to purposely intervene and ‘mediate’ incidental learning that promotes emergent literacy.
A traditional, formal classroom-based learning programme that is tightly structured and ‘basics bound’ should be
avoided as it does not optimise literacy acquisition for the Grade R child. Grade R should not be a ‘watered down’
Grade One. It has its own unique characteristics based on how children in this age group make sense of their world
and acquire the knowledge, skills, values and attitudes that will allow them to maximise the opportunities afforded in
the formal learning years.

Focus on informal and spontaneous learning in various ‘rings’ during the day. Also develop a daily programme that
allows optimal time for free play and is coupled with an acute awareness on the part of the teacher of what could be
called ‘teachable moments’, moments that arise in many instances out of the children’s own interests and creativity.
The entire school day should be viewed as possibilities for enhancing literacy learning; either because of the direct
intervention of the teacher, through planned mediated moments, including teacher-guided activities or because of
the numerous incidental learning opportunities that occur during the day and enable the teacher to promote learning
though utilising the ‘teachable moment’. Such moments most frequently occur during routine periods and, of course,
free play.

From a literacy perspective, teachable moments will afford the teacher the opportunity to ask, for example, open-
ended questions or to offer an alternative suggestion to the child and so instil in the child the desire to further his/her
own learning. It becomes a question of the teacher knowing when to intervene in the learning process and when to
stand back and allow the child the opportunity of providing his/her own solution to the problem at hand.

In the Grade R year the time table is called the daily programme and it comprises three main components, namely
teacher-guided activities, routines and child-initiated activities or free play. Specific teacher-guided literacy
learning opportunities are offered during the morning language ring (for example, theme/topic discussion/language
ring; daily weather discussions; telling ‘news’; show and tell rings and story time). Depending on the choice of focus
(i.e. the teacher must have a clear idea of what learning s/he wants to promote) creative art activities, perceptual
rings, movement, music and dramatisation rings can have a very specific literacy focus especially in refining the
perceptual-motor concepts and skills which underpin formal reading.

Routines provide excellent opportunities for incidentally promoting various literacy skills. For example, instead of
letting the children stand in a queue and wait to go to the bathroom, the teacher can use this time to promote
phonemic awareness. All children whose names begin with the letter/sound ‘S’ go to the bathroom, now children
whose names begin with the letter/sound ‘N’ etc. The other children could be playing word games such as ‘I spy with
my little eye’ or having vocabulary reinforced, for example, what rhymes with dog; what do you think dogs like to eat?
Snack time and tidy up time provide similar learning opportunities as the teacher encourages the children to play fun
sound and word games.

During free-play the teacher can promote literacy in two ways. Firstly, through the structuring of the free play area.
The teacher provides choices based on the types of learning opportunities she/he would like to promote. Outdoor
free play such as climbing on a wooden climbing frame or riding on the cycle track might promote spatial awareness

 20 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
behaviours such as crossing the midline (one of the important perceptual-motor behaviours for acquiring both reading
and writing skills) and encourage letter/word recognition by providing opportunities for children to ‘read’ road signs.
Indoor free play activities should provide similar literacy learning opportunities. A memory game encourages visual
memory and a fantasy corner promotes speaking and listening opportunities. The second way of promoting literacy
during free play is through purposeful intervention. This can be done through, for example, the asking of thoughtful
questions which extend thinking and enlarge vocabulary. By making helpful suggestions and inviting a child to think
about alternative answers and ways of problem solving, a teacher can encourage a child to think more deeply about
an issue and find good reasons for the choices they make. In this way not only literacy but holistic development is
addressed.

In a balanced, flexible language rich daily programme, literacy learning opportunities are offered throughout the
day. At the same time, important principles underpinning early learning are reinforced, namely, that young children
learn best through movement (kinaesthetically) and then through interacting with concrete materials (three dimensional
learning) before engaging with table top and paper and pencil activities (two dimensional representational activities).

Assessment practices in Grade R should be informal and children should not be subjected to a ‘test ’ situation.
For this reason Assessment Activities have not been included in the Grade R Curriculum and Assessment Policy
Document (CAPS). Each activity used for assessment should be carefully planned so that it integrates a variety of
skills. In Grade R most of the assessment takes place through observation with the teacher recording the results of
the assessment using a checklist. Thus, as the year progresses a full picture of each child complete with challenges
and strengths is gradually built. This allows for challenges to be addressed and strengths to be maximised.

CAPS 21
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
sECTION 3
Content and Teaching Plans for Language Skills
 LANGUAGE

DAILY PROGRAMME: GRADE R • ACTIVITIES DESIGNED
 FROM CAPS (HOME
 LANGUAGE)
 • STORIES
 ARRIVAL AND FREE PLAY • DRAMATISATION
 • BOOKS/PICTURES
 • PICTURE READING
 GREETING BIRTHDAYS • PICTURE -DISCUSSIONS
 REGISTER NEWS Language • PERCEPTUAL ACTIVITIES
 WEATHER CHART Mathematics • PARENT POSTER
 36
 Life Skills • PARENT LETTER
MIN TEACHER Lang
 GUIDED Maths • NEWS
 
   ACTIVITY LS • POEMS/RHYMES
 • MUSIC/SONGS/RHYMES
 • TAPES
 • THEME DISCUSSIONS
 
  FANTASY PLAY
 
   • HUMAN MOVEMENT
 ART ACTIVITY (every ROLE PLAY ACTIVITIES
 day: 1 MAIN + 2/3 CONSTRUCTION- • ROUTINES
 50 PLAY
MIN supporting activities • FREE PLAY
 FREE PLAY INSIDE BLOCKS
 TIDY UP INSIDE EDUCATIONAL
 TOYS
 PERCEPTUAL -
 TEACHER Lang GAMES
 30 LIFE SKILLS
 GUIDED Math PUZZLES
 MIN
 ACTIVITY LS BOOK CORNER • ACTIVITIES DESIGNED
 QUIET TIME FROM CAPS (LIFE SKILLS)
10 MIN • HUMAN MOVEMENT
 TOILET ROUTINE Lang, Math, LS,
 ACTIVITIES
 • SONGS AND MUSIC
20 MIN REFRESHMENTS Lang, Math, LS • POEMS AND RHYMES
 
   • THEME DISCUSSION
 Water play • BIRTHDAYS
 SAND PLAY • ROUTINES
 
   ROLE PLAY • FREE PLAY
 FREE PLAY OUTSIDE BALLS
 60 and
MIN SWINGS
 TIDY UP
 WHEEL TOYS
 EDUCATIONAL
 TOYS MATHEMATICS
 JUNGLE GYM
 • ACTIVITIES DESIGNED
10 MIN TYRES FROM CAPS (MATH)
 TOILET ROUTINE Lang, Math, LS,
 H. MOVEMENT • SONGS AND MUSIC
 GAMES ACTIVITIES
 TEACHER Lang • PERCEPTUAL ACTIVITIES
 30 GUIDED Math • COUNTING RHYMES
 MIN ACTIVITY LS • THEME DISCUSSIONS
 • SCIENCE EXPERIMENTS
 • FREE PLAY
 • ROUTINES
 30 STORY Every day
 MIN

 REST/QUIET TIME and
 DEPARTURE

 22 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE R GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3
 • Listens to stories and acts these out • Listens to stories and expresses • Listens to stories and poems and • Listens for the main idea and for detail

CAPS
 feelings about the story answers higher-order questions in stories and answers open-ended
 • Listens and responds to simple
 questions
 questions • Listens to instructions and • Listens to a complex sequence
 announcements and responds of instructions and responds • Listens to a story and works out cause
 • Listens to and repeats rhythmic
 appropriately appropriately and effect
 patterns, and copies correctly
 • Listens without interrupting, taking • Listens without interrupting showing • Expresses feelings about a text and
 • Listens to and recalls simple word
 turns to speak and asking questions respect for the speaker, asking gives reasons
 sequences in order (e.g. big, beg, bag)
 for clarification questions and commenting on what
 • Listens to a complex sequence
 • Names and points to parts of the body was heard
 • Listens, enjoys and responds to picture of instructions and responds
 • Sings simple songs and does action and word puzzles, riddles and jokes • Talks about personal experiences and appropriately
 rhymes more general news
 • Talks about personal experiences and • Engages in conversation as a social
 • Talks about pictures in posters, theme feelings • Tells a story that has a beginning, skill, accepting and respecting the way
 charts, books etc middle and end others speak
 • Tells a familiar story which has a
 • Matches and sorts things according to beginning, middle and end • Expresses feelings about a story or • Makes an oral presentation (e.g. tells
 shape, colour etc poem and gives reasons personal news, describes something
 • Answers closed and open-ended
 experienced, recounts an event)

 LISTENING AND SPEAKING
 • Participates in discussions and asks questions • Answers open-ended questions and
 questions justifies answer • Tells a short story with a simple plot
 • Role plays different situations
 and different characters
 • Makes up own rhymes
 • Participates in class discussions
 • Uses language imaginatively (e.g. tells
 • Role plays different situations
 • Uses terms such as sentence, capital jokes and riddles)
 letter, full stop • Participates in discussions, and reports
 • Interviews people for a particular
 back on the group’s work
 purpose
 • Uses terms such as noun, adjective,
 • Uses terms such as subject, verb,
 verb, pronoun, preposition, comma,
 object, question, statement, command,
 question mark, paragraph
 synonym, antonym, exclamation mark

23
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3

24
 • Identifies rhyming words in well known • Identifies letter-sound relationships of • Consolidates Grade 1 phonics • Consolidates Grade 1&2 phonics
 rhymes and songs such as Humpty all single letters
 • Revises common consonant digraphs • Recognises consonant digraphs at
 Dumpty
 • Builds words using sounds learnt (e.g. (sh, ch, th) at the beginning and end the beginning and end of words (sh-,
 • Begins to recognise that words are words with. -at, -et, -it, -ot, -ut, -ag, of words -sh, ch-, -ch, th-, -th and wh-) at the
 made up of sounds, e.g. the beginning e.g. -ig, -og, -ug, -an, -en, -in, -un, beginning and end of words
 • Recognises ‘wh’ at the beginning of a
 letter(s) of their names -am)
 word • Recognises ‘silent e’ or split digraphs
 • Segments oral sentences into • Uses consonant blends to build up in words (e.g. same, bite, note)
 • Uses initial and final consonant blends
 individual words and break down words (r and l blends
 to build up and break down words, • Recognises vowels such as -ere, -air,
 )
 • Divides multisyllabic words into , e.g. bl-a-ck, bri-ng, sa-ng 3-letter -are
 syllables • Recognises common consonant consonant blends at the beginning of
 • Recognises and uses spelling patterns
 digraphs at the beginning and end of words, e.g. str-ip, str-ap
 • Recognises aurally and visually (e.g. -igh (high), -ough (tough), -eigh
 a word, e.g. sh, ch and th
 some initial consonants and vowels • Recognises vowel digraphs, e.g. ‘oo’ (neigh), -augh (caught)
 especially at the beginning of a word • Recognises plurals (‘s’ and ‘es’) and as in moon, ‘ee’ as in tree, ‘oa’; ‘ea’
 • Recognises and uses rhyming words
 word endings ( ‘ing’ and ‘ed’) aurally short ‘oo’ as in book, ‘ai’ as in ‘rain’
 (e.g. blow, flow, glow)
 • Groups common words into sound • Recognises ‘silent e’/split digraph in
 • Recognises that some sounds can be
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 families words, for xample. tape
 represented by a number of different
 • Recognises at least 5 new vowel spelling choices, e.g. ow (cow) ou
 digraphs, e.g. ‘ar’ as in car, ‘er’ as in (found), aw (draw), au (autumn); tie,
 fern, ‘ir’ as in shirt, ‘or’ as in short, ‘ur’ high, sky; few, blue
 as in church etc.
 • Recognises digraphs making /f/, e.g.
 • Recognises common double ‘ph’ as in elephant)
 consonants such as ll,at the end of

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Recognises silent letters in words, i.e.
 words
 ‘k’, ‘l’, ‘b’ ‘w’
 • Recognises and uses suffixes such as
 • Recognises hard and soft sounds of
 -ly, -ies
 ‘c’ and ‘g’
 • Spells words correctly using their
 • Recognises and uses synonyms and
 phonic knowledge
 antonyms
 • Builds words using the phonic sounds
 • Recognises and uses prefixes such
 taught during the year.
 as un-, re-) and suffixes such as -ful,

 PHONICS
 -ness)
 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3
 • Uses words that are pronounced and

CAPS
 spelt the same but have different
 meanings (homophones)

 • Uses words that sound the same but
 are spelt differently

 • Builds 3, 4 and 5-letter words

 • Sorts letters and words into
 alphabetical order

 • Spells words correctly using their

 PHONICS (contd)
 phonic knowledge

25
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE R GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3

26
 Emergent Reading Skills Emergent Reading Skills Shared Reading as a class with Shared Reading as a class with
 teacher teacher
 • Recognises and points out common • Develops book handling skills (holding
 objects in pictures the book and turning pages correctly) • Reads Big Books or other enlarged • Reads enlarged texts such as fiction
 texts (e.g. fiction and non-fiction and non-fiction big books, newspaper
 • Arranges a set of pictures in such a • Interprets pictures to make up own
 books, poems and songs) articles, plays, dialogues and
 way that they form a story story i.e. ‘reads’ the pictures
 • Uses visual cues i.e. pictures and the electronic texts (computer texts)
 • Interprets pictures , e.g. makes up • Reads logos, labels and other words
 cover of a book to predict what the • Reads book and discusses the main
 own story and ‘reads’ the pictures from environmental print
 story is about idea, the characters, the ‘problem’ in
 • Acts out parts of a story, song or • Recognises own name and names of the story, the plot and the values in
 • Identifies key details in what was read
 rhyme peers the text
 • Expresses whether a story was
 • Holds the book the right way up and • Reads labels and captions in the • Answers a range of higher order
 liked and is able to justify the
 turns pages correctly classroom questions based on the passage read
 response, e.g. ‘I didn’t enjoy the story
 • Pretends to read and adopts a • Develops basic concepts of print because…’ • Reads different poems on a topic
 ‘reading voice’ including
 • Answers higher order questions • Uses visual cues to talk about a
 • Recognises own name and names of • *Concept of a book based on the text read, e.g. ‘In your graphical text, e.g. advertisements,
 some other children in the class • *Concept of words and letters opinion…’ pictures, graphs, charts and maps
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 • Begins to ‘read’ high frequency words • *Directionality - Start reading at front, • Discusses different cultures • Finds and uses sources of information,
 seen in the classroom and at school, end at back; read from left to right and represented in stories e.g. community members, library
 e.g. door, cupboard) top to bottom of a page books
 • Interprets pictures and other print
 Shared Reading as a class with Shared Reading as a class with
 teacher media, e.g. photographs, calendars, • Uses table of contents, index and
 teacher
 advertisements; newspaper and page numbers to find information
 • ‘Reads’ enlarged texts such as poems, • Reads Big Books or other enlarged magazine pictures, posters • Uses key words and headings to find
 Big Books. posters texts
 information in non-fiction texts

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Makes links to own experience when • Uses pictures and the book cover to
 reading with the teacher • Uses a dictionary to find new
 predict what the story is about
 vocabulary and their meanings
 • Describes characters in stories and • Discusses the story, identifying the
 gives opinions main idea and characters
 • Predicts what will happen in a story • Sequences the events in the story
 through the pictures
 • Recognises cause and effect in a
 • Answers questions based on the story story, e.g. The girl got into trouble
 read because she broke a window
 • Draws pictures capturing main idea of

 READING AND VIEWING
 the stories
 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE R GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3
 • Gives an opinion on what was read

CAPS
 • Answers open-ended questions based
 on the passage read

 • Interprets information from posters,
 pictures and simple tables, e.g. a.
 calendar

27
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3

28
 Group guided reading Group guided reading Group guided reading
 • Reads aloud from own book in a • Reads silently and aloud from fiction • Reads both silently and out loud from
 guided reading group with teacher i.e. and non-fiction books at own level in own book in a guided reading group with
 the whole group reads the same story a guided reading group with teacher, the teacher i.e. whole group reads the
 i.e. whole group reads same text same text
 • Uses phonics, context clues, structural
 analysis and sight words when reading • Uses sight words, phonics, • Uses phonics, contextual and structural
 contextual and structural analysis, analysis, when reading unfamiliar words
 • Reads with increasing fluency and and comprehension skills to make
 expression meaning • Uses self-correcting strategies when
 reading
 • Monitors self when reading, both • Reads with increasing fluency and
 in the area of word recognition and speed using correct pronunciation • Monitors self when reading, both
 comprehension. in the area of word recognition and
 • Uses self-correcting strategies when comprehension
 • Shows an understanding of reading
 punctuation when reading aloud • Uses diagrams and illustrations in text to
 • Monitors themselves when reading, increase understanding
 Paired/Independent Reading both in the area of word recognition
 and comprehension • Reads with increasing fluency, speed
 • Reads own writing, starting to correct and expression
 errors Paired/Independent Reading
 Paired/Independent Reading
 • Reads independently books read in • Reads own and others writing
 Shared Reading sessions, simple • Reads own and others writing
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 picture story books and books from • Reads aloud to a partner
 the classroom reading corner. • Reads aloud to a partner
 • Reads independently simple fiction
 and non-fiction books, poetry cards, • Reads independently simple fiction
 comics and non-fiction books and books from
 Independent Reading different cultures, books read in Shared
 • Plays reading games and completes Reading sessions, magazines and

 READING AND VIEWING (contd)
 • Reads picture books crosswords comics

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3

CAPS
 • Develops small muscle skills through • Practises holding and manipulating Maintenance of the print script Transition to a joined script or cursive
 finger play, e.g. play dough, screwing crayon and pencil writing
 nuts onto bolts • Uses handwriting tools effectively, e.g.
 • Develops directionality: left to right; pencil, eraser, ruler • Uses handwriting tools effectively, e.g.
 • Develops fine motor control using and top to bottom pencil, eraser, ruler
 scissors to cut out bold outlined • Aligns writing on 17 mm ruled lines
 pictures, shapes etc • Develops hand-eye co-ordination by • Writes a sentence legibly and correctly
 drawing patterns and tracing • Forms upper and lower case letters in both the print script and the joined
 • Develops eye-hand co-ordination by correctly script or cursive writing
 playing eg catching and throwing, • Copies and writes own name, short
 words and sentences • Writes words with correct spacing • Forms all lower and upper-case letters
 drawing and painting between letters and words in joined script or cursive writing
 • Traces simple outlines of pictures, • Begins to write using drawings and
 copies letters, numbers, words and • Writes in print script all capitals and • Writes short words in the joined script
 patterns and letters in own name lower case letters
 where the correct starting point and simple sentences or cursive writing
 direction arrows are included on all • Forms lower and upper case letters • Copies and writes one paragraph of • Transcribes words and sentences
 letters correctly and fluently between 3 - 4 lines from a printed text correctly in the joined script or cursive
 • Forms letters using finger painting, • Copies and writes different formats writing
 • Forms numerals correctly
 paint brushes, wax crayons etc of writing (short invitations such as • Makes transition to the joined script or
 starting at the right point and following • Copies and writes short sentences birthday invitations; messages; lists cursive writing in all written recording
 the correct direction correctly with correct spacing etc (i.e. the date, own name; and own
 • Holds pencil and crayon correctly • Uses print script in all forms of written written texts)
 • Copies patterns, words and letters
 recording • Copies written text from the board,
 (using the correct starting point and
 direction when forming letters) Transition to a joined script or cursive textbooks, work cards etc. correctly
 writing • Writes neatly and legibly with
 • Uses a range of writing tools, e.g.
 paintbrushes, wax crayons • Copies and writes writing patterns in confidence and speed in a joined
 the joined script or cursive writing script or cursive writing
 • Copies and writes all lower case • Experiments with using a pen for
 letters and commonly used capital writing
 letters in the joined script or cursive
 writing
 • Copies, writes and reads short words
 in joined script or cursive writing
 • Copies and writes short sentences in

 HANDWRITING
 joined script or cursive writing.

29
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 OVERVIEW OF THE LANGUAGE SKILLS TO BE TAUGHT IN THE HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R GRADE 1 GRADE 2 GRADE 3

30
 • Draws or paints pictures to convey a • Draws pictures to convey a message, • Contributes ideas and words for a • Contributes ideas, words and
 message e.g. draws about a personal class story (Shared Writing) sentences for a class story (Shared
 experience Writing)
 • Copies known letters in own name to • Writes a simple poem
 represent writing • Contributes ideas for and helps to • Uses pre-writing strategies to gather
 revise a class/group story (Shared • Writes an expressive text such as a information and plan writing
 • ‘Writes’ from left to right and top to Writing). birthday card or letter
 bottom • Writes a selection of short texts
 • Copies one sentence of news from the • Writes at least two paragraphs (ten for different purposes, e.g. writes
 • Contributes ideas for a class news board/chart correctly sentences) on personal experiences or recounts, dialogues
 book by means of drawings events such as a family celebration
 • Writes a message on a card such as a • Writes about personal experiences
 • Makes an attempt to write letters using get well card • Drafts, writes and ‘publishes’ own story in different forms, e.g. writes a short
 squiggles, scribbles etc of at least two paragraphs for others newspaper article
 • Writes and illustrates a caption or short to read
 • Talks to own writing, e.g. ‘reads’ what sentence on a topic, e.g. to contribute • Drafts, writes, edits and ‘publishes’
 squiggles ‘say’ to a book for the reading corner • Uses informational structures when own story of at least two paragraphs
 writing, e.g. writes recipes (at least 12 sentences) for others to
 • Makes own books and contributes to • Writes at least three sentences of own
 class book collection • Organises information in a chart or read
 news or creative story using capital
 letters and full stops table • Writes and illustrates six to eight
 • Writes and illustrates sentences (4 - 6 sentences on a topic to contribute to a
 • Writes sentences using words book for the class library
 containing the phonic sounds and sentences) on a topic to contribute to a
 common sight words already taught book for the reading corner • Uses informational structures when

 WRITING
 • Uses the writing process (drafting, writing, e.g. experiments, recipes
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 • With help uses nouns and pronouns (I,
 you, she, he, it etc) correctly in writing writing and editing) • Keeps a diary for one week
 • Begins to use present and past tense • Uses correct punctuation (full stops, • Writes a simple book review
 correctly in writing commas, question marks and
 exclamation marks) • Sequences information and puts it
 • Forms the plurals of familiar words under headings
 • Spells common words correctly and
 • Spells common words correctly attempts to spell unfamiliar words • Summarises and records information,
 using phonic knowledge e.g. using mind maps
 • Uses prepositions correctly
 • Uses present, past and future tenses • Uses punctuation correctly, e.g. capital

CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 • Organises information into a simple correctly letters, full stops, commas, question
 graphic form (chart or timeline) marks, exclamation marks, inverted
 • Uses prepositions, nouns, verbs and commas, apostrophes in contractions)
 • Builds own word bank and personal pronouns correctly
 dictionary • Uses conjunctions to form compound
 • Builds own word bank and personal sentences
 dictionary
 • Uses phonics knowledge and spelling
 • Uses a dictionary rules to write more difficult words
 • Uses a dictionary
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
3.1 GRADE R

 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME PER WEEK : 10 hours

 SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME PER DAY : 2 hours

 Integrated in Daily Programme
 TERM 1
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL)

 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

 Daily activities in all areas of Language and other subjects.

 The following activities could be introduced during any or all of the Grade R rings (circles): music, movement, science,
 language, news, show and tell, story as well as creative activities.

 In Grade R perceptual work is extremely important because it underpins and prepares the foundations for future
 learning. Make sure sufficient time is spent building these perceptual skills daily and throughout the course of the
 school year.

 • Listens attentively to simple questions and announcements and responds appropriately
 • Listens to simple instructions and acts on them
 • Listens to and repeats rhythmic patterns, e.g. clap, clap-clap, clap, and copies correctly
 • Listens without interrupting
 • Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time
 • Sings simple songs and does actions (with help), e.g. ‘This is the way I wash my hands, wash my hands, wash my hands…’
 (Do the same with ‘comb my hair….’, ‘brush my teeth…..’)

 • Recites simple rhymes and does actions (with help)
 • Listens to and recalls simple word sequences, in order, such as big, beg, bag. Start with three words and build up to four or
 more so that memory of what the ears have heard is developed

 • Develops skills to select and identify a specific sound when a background noise is present or music is playing, e.g. select
 the teacher’s voice from noises or sounds in the background

 • Talks about pictures in posters, theme charts, books etc. related to a minimum of five themes per term
 • Tells stories and retells stories of others in own words
 Uses language to develop concepts in all subjects

 • Develops language to develop concepts: shape, colour, age, time and sequence
 Uses language to think and reason:

 • Identifies and describes similarities and differences
 • Matches things that go together, and compares things that are different
 • Classifies familiar items such as puts all toys in box, books on shelves, crayons in tins, sorts according to colour etc.
 • Identifies parts from the whole such as names and points to parts of the body
 Uses language to investigate and explore

 • Asks questions
 • Gives explanations
 • Solves and completes at least five or more piece jig-saw puzzles

CAPS 31
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Processes information:

• Picks out selected information from a description
Uses visual and pictorial cues to make meaning

• Recognises and points out common objects in pictures
• Participates in activities to perceive objects in the foreground and the background and to separate them meaningfully such
 as finds an image in a busy or detailed picture

• Plays games such as ‘Where is it?’ finding an object hidden in a classroom among other items
• Distinguishes between the shape of different letters and words through activities such as sorting identical objects, viewing
 sequence of nearly identical pictures, picking out the one that is different and explaining why it is different

• Arranges a set of three pictures in such a way that they form a story and a logical sequence of events when verbalised and
 relates the story created

• Remembers what the eyes have seen in a memory game. For example: put different objects on the table, children look at
 these, teacher covers objects and children have to recall what they saw on the table.

• Completes a puzzle or picture
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Listens attentively to simple questions and announcements and responds appropriately
• Sings and recites simple songs and rhymes
• Listens to short stories with enjoyment and joins in choruses at the appropriate time
• Tells stories and retells stories of others in own words
• Develops language to develop concepts for shape, colour, age
• Identifies and describes similarities and differences
• Identifies parts from the whole such as names and points to parts of the body
• Uses language to give explanations
• Solves and completes at least five or more piece jig-saw puzzles
• Recognises and points out common objects in pictures
Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

 32 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 1
EMERGENT READING
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Reading

Emergent reading skills

• Develops correct eye movements such as following a swinging ball moved from left to right.
• Participates in directionality activities such as moving the body left to right and top to bottom
• Distinguishes between the shapes of different letters and words such sorting objects that are the same, sequencing of
 pictures, picking out the picture that is different

• Uses sequencing skills to order three pictures and relate the story created
• Uses memory skills to recall items seen such as letters, shapes or concrete objects
• Completes a visual picture such as building puzzles, completing pictures
• Holds the book the right way up and turns pages correctly
• Uses pictures to predict what the story is about: ‘reads’ pictures and captions showing an understanding that pictures and
 words are related but different

• Makes up own story by ‘reading’ the pictures
• Pretends to read and adopts a ‘reading voice’
• Recognises own name and names of at least five other children in the class
• Matches words to words on objects and named items such as name cards on tables, door, window
Begins to make meaning of written text

• Understands that print communicates meaning: a word can represent one’s own name
• Recognises own name and names of at least five other children in the class
• Understands that written words refer to spoken words
• ‘Reads’ high frequency words: own name, common brand names such as SPAR, Coke, and television programme titles etc.
Shared Reading

Activities of 15 minutes two or three times a week using enlarged texts such as Big Books, posters of songs and
rhymes. Teacher models process with the whole class during discussion or language rings over a minimum of two
sessions in the Language Focus Time.

Use at least five Big Books per term.

• ‘Reads’ enlarged texts such as poems, big books and posters as a whole class with the teacher (Shared Reading)
• Discusses and describes characters in stories
• Draws pictures capturing main idea of the stories, songs or rhymes
• Sequences pictures in a story
• Responds to stories through movement and drama activities or rings
Independent Reading

• ‘Reads’ independently books for pleasure in the library or classroom reading corner
Phonological/ Phonemic Awareness

Daily 15 minute activities

CAPS 33
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Many of the sound activities listed below can be introduced during routines and rings

• Distinguishes aurally between different sounds especially at the beginning of own name
• Identifies a sound that does not belong in a sequence: ‘Which sound does not belong - b, b, k, b; d, d, d, t ?’
• Identifies whether two given sounds are the same or different: /p/, /p/ [same]; /p/, /d/ [different]
• Can identify that oral sentences are made up of individual words: clap on each word in a sentence where all words have
 only one syllable [Ben is good]

Relates sounds to letters and words

• Begins to recognise that words are made up of sounds: gives the beginning sound of own name
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation
• Distinguishes aurally between different letter sounds especially at the beginning of own name
• Identifies a sound that does not belong in a sequence: ‘Which sound does not belong - b, b, k, b; d, d, d, t?

Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

 34 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 1
EMERGENT WRITING
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Emergent Handwriting:

Daily activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

Creative art activities and music rings are ideal opportunities for the development of fine motor skills

• Develops fine-motor skills for strengthening hands: rolls plasticine, models with play dough, screws nuts onto bolts, plays
 the piano in the air, etc.

• Develops fine-motor control to strengthen fingers: plays finger rhymes with finger actions or rolls small paper balls between
 fingers, etc.

• Develops fine-motor control: uses scissors to cut fringes on paper mats etc.
• Develops eye-hand co-ordination: plays catch with bean bags, balls, paper balls, draws with crayons or paints informally
 during outdoor play etc.

• Develops directionality: moves parts of the body to the left or right, up or down etc.
• Crosses the midline: takes the right hand across the midline to touch the left shoulder etc.
• Forms letters in various ways using the whole body: by using own body to make the letter ‘l’
• Traces simple outlines of pictures and patterns
• Copies patterns onto pegboards
• Uses a range of writing tools: paint brushes, wax crayons etc. during free indoor play or creative art activities
• ‘Writes’ in sand trays
Emergent Writing:

• Draws or paints pictures to convey messages during creative art activities such as about a personal experience
• Understands that writing and drawing are different: pretend writing represented using squiggles
• ‘Reads’ own writing: ‘reads’ what squiggles ‘say’
• Role-plays writing in play situations: takes a telephone message, writes a traffic fine etc.
• Copies known letters in own name to represent writing: copies own name
• ‘Writes’ from left to right and top to bottom
• Contributes ideas for a class news book by means of drawings
Works with words

• Groups words: those that start with same initial sound such as ‘Charmaine’ and ‘Shireen; or same letter such as ‘Mpho’ and
 ‘Michael’)

• Identifies name in print

CAPS 35
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Draws or paints pictures to convey messages during creative art activities such as about a personal experience
• Forms letters in various ways using the whole body: by using own body to make the letter ‘l’
• ‘Writes’ in sand trays
• Understands that writing and drawing are different: pretend writing represented using squiggles
• ‘Reads’ own writing: ‘reads’ what squiggles ‘say’
• Uses a range of writing tools: paint brushes, wax crayons etc. during free indoor play or creative art activities
Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

 36 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL)
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

The following activities could be introduced during any or all of the Grade R rings (circles): music, movement, science,
language, news, show and tell, story as well as creative activities

• Listens to two or three part instructions, announcements and responds appropriately (e.g. ‘Collect the crayons and put them
 on the shelf.’)

• Listens without interrupting, taking turns to speak
• Listens to stories and acts these out
• Tells stories and retells the stories of other children in own words
• Sings songs, recites rhymes and performs actions with the whole class
• Recites poems and rhymes and adds actions to them in a group
• Sequences pictures of a story
• Participates in discussions and asks questions
• Talks about pictures in posters, theme charts, books etc. related to a minimum of five themes per term
• Listens to and recalls in order simple word sequences such as big, beg, bag. Start with three words, build up to four or more
Uses language to develop concepts

• Uses language to develop concepts in all subject areas such as quantity, direction, time, sequence, colour, age
Uses language to think and reason

• Identifies and describes similarities and differences
• Matches things that go together, and compares things that are different
• Classifies things according to colour, shape or size
• Identifies parts from the whole. For example names parts of the body such as elbow, wrist, knee etc.
Uses language to investigate and explore

• Asks questions and asks for explanations
• Gives explanations and asks for clarification
• Solves and completes ten or more piece jig-saw puzzles
Processes information:
• Picks out selected information from a description

Uses visual and pictorial cues to make meaning

• Looks carefully at pictures and talks about common experiences
• Finds specified images in a busy or detailed picture
• Plays games such as ‘Search!’ finding an object hidden in a classroom among other items
• Distinguishes between the shape of different letters and words. For example, sorts identical objects, views a sequence of
 nearly identical pictures and picks out the one that is different and explains why it is different

• Orders a sequence of pictures and relates the story created

CAPS 37
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Listens without interrupting, taking turns to speak
• Sings songs, recites rhymes and performs actions with the whole class
• Recites poems and rhymes and adds actions to them in a group
• Tells stories and retells the stories of other children in own words
• Uses language to develop concepts in all subject areas such as quantity, direction, time, sequence, colour, age
• Participates in discussions and asks questions
• Finds specified images in a busy or detailed picture
• Identifies and describes similarities and differences
• Looks carefully at pictures and talks about common experiences
Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

 38 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
EMERGENT READING
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Reading

Emergent reading

• Develops correct eye movement such as following a ball moved from left to right
• Develops directionality such as moving blocks from left to right and top to bottom
• Holds the book the right way up and turns pages correctly when ‘reading’
• Uses pictures to predict what the story is about. For example, ‘reads’ picture and caption books showing an understanding
 that pictures and words are related, but different. Points to words when ‘reading’

• Interprets pictures to make up own story: ‘reads’ the pictures
• Pretends to read and adopts a ‘reading voice’
• Understands that print communicates meaning. Knows words can represent own name, names of people, places and things
• Recognises own name and names of five other children in the class
• ‘Reads‘ theme related flashcards and captions in a group with the teacher
• Understands that written words refer to spoken words such as daily news written down by the teacher as the child speaks
• ‘Reads’ high frequency words: peer names, calendar and weather words
• Uses pictures to ‘read’ simple phrase or caption books. The dog - a page with a picture of a dog)
• Acts out parts of a story, song or rhyme
• Listens to and discusses stories and other texts read or told aloud. Recalls details and states main idea
• Talks about texts such as stories using terms such as ‘beginning’, ‘middle’, ‘end’, ‘sound’, ‘word’, ‘letter’, ‘rhyme’
Shared Reading

Activities of 15 minutes two or three times a week using enlarged texts such as Big Books, posters etc. Teacher
models the process with the whole class during for example a discussion or language ring over a minimum of two
sessions in the Language Focus Time. Use at least five Big Books per term.

• Reads’ enlarged texts such as poems, big books, posters and electronic texts (computer texts) as a whole class with the
 teacher (Shared Reading)

• Discusses and describes characters in stories
• Draws pictures capturing the main idea of stories, songs or rhymes
• Arranges a set of pictures in such a way that they form a story and then ’reads’ the story
• Responds to stories through movement and drama activities or rings (e.g. ‘The Three Little Pigs’)
• Predicts what will happen next in the story using familiar texts and picture cues
• Responds to stories through creative art: paints a picture of the story
Independent Reading

• ‘Reads’ independently books for pleasure in the library or classroom reading corner
Phonological/Phonemic Awareness

Daily 15 minute activities

CAPS 39
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Many of the sound activities listed below could be introduced during routines and rings

• Distinguishes aurally between different sounds especially at the beginning of words
• Listens for the odd word in a sequence where all words begin with the same sound. For example, ring, rose, round, pose)
 or identifies whether two given sounds are the same or different . /c/, /c/ [same] or /c/, /g/ [different]

• Divides multisyllabic words into syllables: uses clapping or drum beats on each syllable in the word ‘ba-na-na’ or identifies
 the number of syllables (claps) in the names of the children in the class: ‘Lu-ne-tta’ has three claps, ‘Rose’ one clap

• Identifies rhyming words in well known rhymes and songs. For example, Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall - Humpty Dumpty
 had a great fall

• Anticipates rhyming words in new songs and rhymes and completes the line or sentence
• Recognises initial spoken sounds especially at the beginning of own name
Relates sounds to letters and words

• Understands that words consist of more than one sound. For example, sat - s-a-t done aurally
• Can recognise sounds at the beginning of some words such as friends’ names
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Understands that print communicates meaning: words can represent own name, names of people, places and things
• Holds the book the right way up and turns pages correctly when ‘reading’
• ‘Reads’ enlarged texts such as poems, big books, posters and electronic texts (computer texts) as a whole class with the
 teacher (Shared Reading)

• Discusses and describes characters in stories
• Distinguishes aurally between different sounds especially at the beginning of words
Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

 40 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
EMERGENT WRITING
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Daily activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

Creative art activities and music rings are ideal opportunities for the development of fine motor skills

• Develops fine motor skills for strengthening hand muscles: rolls plasticine, models with play dough, plays a trumpet in the
 air, threads lacing cards, beads etc.

• Develops fine-motor control by playing more finger rhymes with finger actions
• Develops fine-motor control using scissors to cut out bold outlined pictures, shapes etc
• Develops eye-hand co-ordination: plays catch with bean bags, large or tennis balls, paper balls; creates drawings and
 makes more complex patterns with crayons

• Develops large muscle control: works in pairs or on own to form letters with their bodies
• Begins to form letters using finger painting, paint brushes, wax crayons
• Traces simple outlines of pictures, patterns and own names where the correct starting point and writing direction are
 indicated on letters

• Copies patterns onto pegboards and copies patterns, words and letters onto paper
• Uses a range of writing tools: paint brushes, wax crayons etc.
• Holds crayons correctly using an acceptable pencil grip
• ‘Writes’ using a correct sitting position
Emergent Writing:

• Draws pictures to convey a message such as own ‘news’
• Understands that writing and drawing are different and begins to copy letters and numerals from the classroom environment
 in own writing attempts: pretend writing using a mixture of copied letters and squiggles

• ‘Reads’ what letters and squiggles ‘say’
• Role plays writing in play situations: makes greeting cards, writes letters etc.
• Begins to ‘write’ observing conventions of directionality: ‘writes’ from left to right, top to bottom of page
• Spontaneously copies print from the environment such as labels on common household products when playing
Works with words

• Groups words that share the same initial sound or letter
• Identifies a letter or a space between words in print: own names or familiar words or in a book
• Contributes sentences to a class piece of writing: child dictates as the teacher writes

CAPS 41
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Draws pictures to convey a message such as own ‘news’
• Develops large muscle control: work in pairs or on own to form letters with their bodies
• Begins to form letters using finger painting, paint brushes, wax crayons
• Understands that writing and drawing are different and begins to copy letters and numerals from the classroom environment
 in own writing attempts: pretend writing using a mixture of copied letters and squiggles

• ‘Reads’ what letters and squiggles ‘say’

• Begins to ‘write’ observing conventions of directionality: ‘writes’ from left to right, top to bottom of page
Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

 42 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL)
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily activities in all areas of Language and other subjects.

The following activities could be introduced during any or all of the Grade R rings (circles): music, movement, science,
language, news, show and tell, story as well as creative activities

• Listens attentively to questions and gives answers
• Listens to announcements and responds appropriately
• Listens to a complex string of instructions and acts on them
• Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker and takes turns to speak
• Tells stories and retells other children’s stories in own words
• Sings songs and rhymes and performs actions on own
• Recites poems and rhymes and adds actions to them with growing confidence
• Listens to longer stories and shows understanding by answering questions related to the story
• Sequences pictures of a story
• Listens to and recalls in order simple word sequences. For example, rat, mat, cat, sat. Start with three words and build up
 to four or more

• Talks about pictures in posters, theme charts, books etc. related to a minimum of five themes per term
Uses language to develop concepts

• Uses language to develop concepts in all subjects. For example, Mathematics: quantity, size, time, shape, age, direction
 and colour during ring time or informally during free play

Uses language to think and reason

• Identifies and describes similarities and differences
• Matches things that go together and compares things that are different
• Classifies things according to own criteria
• Identifies parts from the whole (e.g. parts that make up a picture)
Uses language to investigate and explore

• Asks questions and looks to books for explanations
• Gives explanations and offers solutions
• Completes between ten and twenty piece jig-saw puzzles
Processes information:
• Picks out selected information from a description

Uses visual and pictorial cues to make meaning

• Understands that pictures and photographs convey meaning about events, people, places and things and talks about these
• Looks carefully at pictures and talks about common experiences
• Isolates images from the foreground and background in pictures and simple designs
• Finds object hidden in a classroom among other items and guides peers to items using simple directions
• Distinguishes between the shape of different letters and words (e.g. ‘c’ and ‘a’)
• Sequences pictures and relates the story created

CAPS 43
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Listens attentively to questions and gives answers
• Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker and takes turns to speak
• Sings songs and rhymes and performs actions on own
• Tells stories and retells other children’s stories in own words
• Uses language to develop concepts in all subjects (e.g. Mathematics - quantity, size, time, shape, age, direction and colour)
• Matches things that go together, and compares things that are different
• Understands that pictures and photographs convey meaning about events, people, places and things and talks about these
• Looks carefully at pictures and talks about common experiences
Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

 44 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
EMERGENT READING
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Reading:

Emergent reading skills

• Develops eye movements. For example, follows a pencil moved from left to right
• Develops directionality: ‘reads’ a series of pictures or arrows from left to right and top to bottom
• Can match words to objects: matches labels to labelled items on an interest table
• Uses pictures to understand simple phrases and sentences in a book. For example, a picture of a dog and a sentence that
 reads ‘Look at the dog.’

• Holds the book the right way up and turns pages correctly
• Interprets pictures to make up own story, that is, ‘reads’ the pictures
• Distinguishes pictures from print: points to a word and asks what the word is
• Pretends to ‘read’ and adopts a ‘reading’ voice
• ‘Reads’ high frequency words in the community: road signs, shop names
• Begins to recognise high frequency words used in the classroom: weather words, days of the week, peers’ names, months
 of the year

• ‘Reads’ picture books with three or four predictable sentences. For example, It is a dog. Look at the dog. It is a big dog.
• Acts out a story, song or rhyme
• Recalls details and states main idea from a story read by the teacher
• Draws pictures of stories, songs or rhymes
• Discusses book handling and care
• Listens to, and discusses, stories and other texts read aloud
• Uses words like ‘sound’, ‘word’, ‘letter’, ‘rhyme’, ‘beginning’, ‘middle’, ‘end’ when talking about text
Shared Reading

Activities of 15 minutes two or three times a week using enlarged texts such as Big Books, posters etc. Teacher
models the process with the whole class during for example a discussion or language ring over a minimum of two
sessions in the Language Focus Time. Use a minimum of five Big Books per term.

• ‘Reads’ big books or other enlarged texts as a whole class with the teacher
• ‘Reads’ class or group generated texts. For example, sentences written by the teacher while the children are watching,
 talking and dictating

• Makes links to own experience when reading with the teacher, viewing television or pictures
• Describes the characteristics of characters in stories or television and gives opinions
• Identifies the sequence of events in simple stories
• Uses cover of book and illustrations throughout the text to predict storyline
• Joins in the shared reading of texts with increasing confidence and enjoyment
• Answers a range of questions based on the story read

CAPS 45
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Independent Reading

• ‘Reads’ books independently for pleasure in the library or classroom reading corner, turning the pages correctly, showing
 respect for books

Phonological/Phonemic Awareness

Daily 15 minute activities

Many of the sound activities listed below could be introduced during routines and rings
• Segments oral sentences into individual words using words of one syllable first (e.g. Sam - is - a - boy )

• Divides multisyllabic words into syllables: uses claps or drumbeats on each syllable in words and names such as ‘cup-
 board’, ‘Jacqueline’. Children then count the syllables

• Identifies rhyming words in well known rhymes and songs and in sequences of rhyming words such as Incey Wincey
 Spider…

• Substitutes rhyming words in common songs and rhymes. For example, Humpty Dumpty sat on a ball. Humpty Dumpty
 said “Oh! I’ll fall”.

• Recognises and names some letters of the alphabet especially own name. For example, My name, Diane, begins with a
 letter d

Relates sounds to letters and words

• Recognises aurally and visually some initial consonants and vowels especially at the beginning of common words. For
 example, in Helen’s name she tells the teacher as she points to the ‘h’ that it says /h/

• Understands that words consist of more than one sound. For example, ‘hand’ has four sounds h-a-n-d
• Recognises sounds at the beginning of some words: friends’ names or names of animals
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Uses pictures to understand simple phrases and sentences in a book. For example, a picture of a dog and a sentence that
 reads ‘Look at the dog.’

• Can match words to objects: matches labels to labelled items on an interest table
• Holds the book the right way up and turns pages correctly
• Interprets pictures to make up own story, that is, ‘reads’ the pictures
• ‘Reads’ class or group generated texts. For example, sentences written by the teacher while the children are watching and
 talking and dictating

• Describes the characteristics of characters in stories or television and gives opinions
• ‘Reads’ high frequency words in the community: road signs, shop names
• Recognises aurally and visually some initial consonants and vowels especially at the beginning of common words. For
 example, in Helen’s name she tells the teacher as she points to the ‘h’ that it says /h/

• Recognises and names some letters of the alphabet especially own name
Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

 46 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
EMERGENT WRITING
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
Emergent Handwriting:
Daily activities in all areas of Language and other subjects
Creative art activities and music rings are ideal opportunities for the development of fine motor skills
• Develops fine motor skills for strengthening hand muscles: forms letters with play dough, threads lacing cards, beads
• Develops fine-motor control by playing more finger rhymes with finger actions
• Develops fine-motor control using scissors to cut out bold outlined pictures, shapes etc
• Develops eye-hand co-ordination: plays catch with bean bags, large or tennis balls, paper balls etc., creates drawings,
 makes more complex patterns with crayons
• Develops large muscle control: works in pairs or on own to form letters with their bodies
• Begins to form letters: uses finger painting, paint brushes, wax crayons, pegboards or elastic boards
• Traces simple outlines of pictures, patterns and own names where the correct starting point and writing direction are
 indicated on letters
• Copies patterns onto pegboards and words and letters onto paper
• Holds crayons using an acceptable pencil grip and writes using a good writing position
Emergent Writing:
• Draws pictures to convey a message about a personal experience and uses this as a starting point for writing. With help
 adds a word or phrase to a drawing
• Understands that writing and drawing are different and begins to copy letters and numerals from the classroom environment
 in own writing attempts: pretend writing using a mixture of copied letters and squiggles
• Role plays writing in play situations. For example, ‘writes’ lists
• Begins to ‘write’ observing conventions of directionality: ‘writes’ from left to right, top to bottom of page
• Copies print from the environment when playing. For example, labels from advertisements
• Contributes ideas for a class news book
• Uses writing tools with greater confidence and ease: crayons and pencils
Works with words
• Groups pictures of rhyming words, e.g. ‘bat’, ‘cat’, ‘hat’
• Identifies a letter or a space between words in print, e.g. their names or familiar words or in a book
• Contributes sentences to a class piece of writing: child dictates as the teacher writes
• Uses terms like ‘beginning’, ‘middle’, ‘end’, ‘sound’, ‘word’, ‘letter’ when talking about texts
ASSESSMENT
Suggestions for Assessment:
Informal
Oral and / or practical
Observation
• Draws pictures to convey a message about a personal experience and uses this as a starting point for writing. With help
 adds a word or phrase to a drawing
• Understands that writing and drawing are different and begins to copy letters and numerals from the classroom environment
 in own writing attempts; pretend writing using a mixture of copied letters and squiggles
• Role plays writing in play situations. For example, ‘writes’ lists
• Begins to ‘write’ observing conventions of directionality: ‘writes’ from left to right, top to bottom of page
Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

CAPS 47
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL)

CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

The following activities could be introduced during any or all of the Grade R rings (circles): music, movement, science,
language, news, show and tell, story as well as creative activities

• Listens attentively to questions and gives answers
• Listens to announcements and responds appropriately
• Passes on messages
• Listens to complex string of instructions and acts on them
• Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker and takes turns to speak
• Listens to longer stories and shows understanding by answering questions related to the story
• Tells stories and retells other children’s stories in own words
• Sings songs and rhymes and performs actions on own with confidence
• Recites poems and rhymes and adds actions to them with confidence
• Sequences pictures of a story
• Participates in discussions and asks questions
• Listens to and recalls simple word sequences such as ‘spark’, ‘bark’, ‘cart’, ‘start’. Start with three words and build up to
 four or more

• Talks about pictures in posters, theme charts, books related to a minimum of five themes per term
Uses language to develop concepts

• Uses language to develop concepts in all subjects such as quantity, size, shape, direction, colour, speed, time, age and
 sequence

Uses language to think and reason

• Identifies and describes similarities and differences
• Matches things that go together, and compares things that are different
• Classifies things according to own criteria and more complex criteria such as textures
• Identifies parts from the whole in a 2-Dimensional format and constructs in 3-Dimensional format. Copies a picture or a
 pattern from a card [2-D] using blocks or plastic shapes [3-D]

Uses language to investigate and explore

• Asks questions and looks to books, television, computers for explanations
• Listens to problems and offers solutions
• Completes 20 piece or more jig-saw puzzles
Processes information:

• Picks out selected information from an oral description. For example, listens for the starting time of an event from an
 announcement

 48 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Uses visual and pictorial cues to make meaning

• Understands that pictures and photographs convey meaning about events, people, places and things and talks about these
• Uses pictures to predict content of stories
• Identifies the foreground and background in pictures as separate elements
• Plays direction games with teacher and friends. Example: ‘snakes and ladders’ board game
• Distinguishes between the shapes of different letters and words: sorts plastic letters into groups of the same letter
• Matches pictures and words using puzzles
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker and takes turns to speak
• Sings songs and rhymes and performs actions on own with confidence
• Tells stories and retells other children’s stories in own words
• Identifies and describes similarities and differences
• Matches things that go together, and compares things that are different
• Looks carefully at pictures and talks about common experiences
• Uses language to develop concepts in all subjects: quantity, size, shape, direction, colour, speed, time, age and sequence
Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

CAPS 49
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
EMERGENT READING
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Reading

Emergent reading skills

• Matches words to pictures in print such as word-picture puzzles

• Interprets pictures to construct ideas. For example, makes up own story and ‘reads’ the pictures

• Distinguishes pictures from print. For example, points to a word and asks for it to be read

• ‘Reads’ personal texts such as sentences written by the teacher

• Begins to ‘read’ high frequency words seen in the classroom and at school: door, cupboard etc.

• ‘Reads’ picture books of increasing complexity

• Acts out a story, song or rhyme

• Recalls details and states main idea

• Draws pictures of stories, songs or rhymes

• Discusses book handling and care

Shared Reading

Activities of 15 minutes two or three times a week using enlarged texts such as Big Books, posters etc. (a minimum
 of five Big Books per term )

• Reads big books or other enlarged texts as a whole class with the teacher

• ‘Reads’ class generated texts such as sentences scribed by the teacher, in a group with the teacher

• Points at words rather than pictures when ‘reading’

• Makes links to own experience when reading with the teacher, viewing television or pictures

• Describes the characteristics of characters in stories or television and gives opinions

• Identifies the sequence of events in simple stories

• Uses cover of book and illustrations throughout the text to predict storyline

• Joins in the shared reading of texts with increasing confidence and enjoyment

• Answers a range of questions based on the story read

Independent Reading

• ‘Reads’ books independently for pleasure in the library or classroom reading corner, turning the pages correctly, showing
 respect for books

Phonological/Phonemic Awareness

Daily 15 minute activities

 50 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Many of the sound activities listed below could be introduced during routines rings

• Segments oral sentences into individual words. For example, claps on each word in a sentence using words of one syllable
 first -‘It is time for lunch’.

• Divides multisyllabic words into syllables: crocodile - croc-o-dile

• Identifies rhyming words in well known rhymes and songs and in sequences of rhyming words

• Recognises aurally and visually some initial consonants and vowels especially at the beginning of common words

• Recognises and names some letters of the alphabet such as letters in own name

• Relates sounds to letters and words and understands that words consist of more than one sound: duck is d-u-ck - done
 aurally

• Recognises sounds at the beginning of some words

• Begins to recognise that words are made up of sounds such as the beginning letter/s of their names
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Interprets pictures to construct ideas: makes up own story and ‘reads’ the pictures

• Reads big books or other enlarged texts as a whole class with the teacher

• Recognises aurally and visually some initial consonants and vowels especially at the beginning of common words

• Recognises and names some letters of the alphabet such as letters in own name

Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

CAPS 51
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE R HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
EMERGENT WRITING
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Emergent Handwriting

Daily activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

Creative art activities and music rings are ideal opportunities for the development of fine motor skills

• Develops fine motor skills for strengthening hand muscles

• Plays finger rhymes with finger actions

• Uses scissors to cut out bold outlined pictures, shapes etc.

• Plays catch with bean bags, large or tennis balls, paper balls etc. as well as through creating drawings, making more
 complex patterns with crayons

• Form letters with their bodies in pairs or on their own

• Forms letters using finger paint, paint brushes, wax crayons

• Traces simple outlines of pictures, patterns and own names where the correct starting point and writing direction are
 indicated on letters

• Copies patterns, words and letters

• Uses a range of writing tools such as paint brushes, wax crayons

• Forms letters with a variety of writing tools such as crayons, pencils, chalk

• Holds crayons correctly showing preference for a particular hand to be used: left/right hand dominance

• Forms some lower case letters correctly, that is, starts and ends in the correct place

Emergent Writing:

• Draws pictures to convey a message about a personal experience and uses this as a starting point for writing: with help
 adds a word, phrase or sentence

• Copies letters and numerals from the classroom environment when ‘writing’

• ‘Reads’ own and others ‘writing’

• ‘Writes’ and asks others to give meaning to what has been written

• Role plays ‘writing’ in play situations. For example, ‘writes’ lists

• ‘Writes’ observing conventions of directionality: ‘writes’ from left to right, top to bottom of page

• Copies print from the environment when playing such as labels from advertisements

• Makes attempts at familiar forms of writing, using known letters. For example, ‘writes’ a letter home

• Contributes ideas for a class news book

• Uses writing tools with increased confidence and ease

Works with words

• Groups pictures of rhyming words such as ‘can’, ‘fan’, ‘pan’

• Copies short sentences and words written by the teacher

• Identifies a letter or a space between words in print such as their names or familiar words or in a book

• Contributes sentences to a class piece of writing: child dictates as the teacher writes

• Uses terms like ‘beginning’, ‘middle’, ‘end’, ‘sound’, ‘word’, ‘letter’, ‘rhyme’

 52 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Assessment:

Informal

Oral and / or practical

Observation

• Draws pictures to convey a message about a personal experience and uses this as a starting point for writing. With help
 adds a word, phrase or sentence

• ‘Writes’ and asks others to give meaning to what has been written

• ‘Reads’ own and others’ ‘writing’

• Copies letters and numerals from the classroom environment when ‘writing’

• Makes attempts at familiar forms of writing, using known letters. For example, ‘writes’ a letter home

Use checklists and a holistic rubric for Language assessment

CAPS 53
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
RECOMMENDED TEXTS/RESOURCES FOR THE YEAR
LISTENING AND SPEAKING

• Pictures and posters

• Colour charts

• Number charts

• Games

• Objects related to the themes and topics

• Story board pieces

• Pictures to sequence

• Jig-saw puzzles (at least 20 pieces)

• Toys such as blocks, construction toys, cars, dolls, puppets, masks etc.

• Sand tray and water play items

• Plastic bottles, jars, boxes etc.

• CDs or tapes with stories (read or told), poems, rhymes and songs, CD player or tape recorder, television and video tapes/
 DVDs

• Musical/ percussion instruments, e.g. a drum, bells, sticks etc.
READING AND PHONICS

• Pictures and posters

• Alphabet charts

• Big books - some produced in Shared writing sessions

• Enlarged texts such as poems, songs, rhymes etc.

• Story books and picture books

• Logos and relevant examples of environmental print

• Newspapers and magazines

• Flash card labels for classroom items and displays

• Name cards for children

• Pointers for both teacher and groups of children to use when reading enlarged texts, wall stories, displays

• Fantasy corner

• Theme table

• Daily helpers’ chart

• Birthday and weather chart
WRITING AND HANDWRITING

• Apparatus such as balls of various sizes, hoops, bean bags, pegboards and pegs, beads and laces, lacing cards and laces,
 nuts and bolts, clothes pegs

• Materials such as scissors, plasticine or play dough, paint, paint brushes, wax crayons, chalk and slates or white boards
 and markers

• Newsprint

• Writing strips or charts where letters of the alphabet are written in print script with correct starting points and writing direction
 indicated

• Blank paper in various sizes (A3, A4, A5)

• Sand tray

 54 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
3.2 GRADE 1

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM

 TERM 1
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

 • Listens without interrupting

 • Talks about personal experiences: tells news, describes weather news, other topical events etc.

 • Sings songs and does the actions

 Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities

 Weeks 1 - 5

 • Listens to simple instructions (classroom routines) and responds appropriately

 • Listens to stories, rhymes, poems and songs with interest and acts out part of the story, song or rhyme

 • Answers questions such as questions related to personal details etc.

 Weeks 6 - 10

 • Sequences pictures of a story communicating through retelling the sequence of ideas

 • Talks about pictures in posters, theme charts, books etc.

 • Participates in discussions, taking turns to speak and respecting others in the group

 • Describes objects in terms of colour, size, shape, quantity using correct vocabulary
 ASSESSMENT

 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

 Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)

 • Answers questions such as questions related to personal details etc.

 • Sings songs and does the actions

 • Participates in discussions, taking turns to speak and respecting others in the group

 Formal Assessment Activity 1:

 Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

 • Talks about personal experiences such as tells news, describes weather news, other topical events etc

 • Listens to stories, rhymes, poems and songs with interest and acts out part of the story, song or rhyme

 • Sequences pictures of a story communicating through retelling the sequence of ideas

 • Describes objects in terms of colour, size, shape, quantity using correct vocabulary

CAPS 55
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 1
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily Phonemic Awareness/ Phonic Activities of 15 minutes:

Begin phonemic awareness activities, teach 1-2 new letters every week and introduce word building using sounds
learnt

• Distinguishes aurally between different initial sounds of words

• Participates in whole class phonemic awareness oral activities: blending sounds [c-a-t into cat]; segmenting words [cat into
 c-a-t]; consonant and vowel substitution word play [ replace the ‘h’ in hat with ‘b’ to make bat]

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of some single letters. For example, l, o, h, m, a, b, t, c. There should be 2 vowels and
 at least 6 consonants

• Recognises and names some letters of the alphabet: 2 vowels and at least 6 consonants

• Begins to build up short words using sounds learnt such as c-a-t - cat

• Begins to use blending to make words. For example, ‘at’ c-at, m-at, identifying the rhymes

Daily Reading Activities

Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.

Emergent reading skills (taught in Shared and Group Guided Reading lessons)

• Holds the book the right way up and turns pages correctly

• Uses pictures to predict what the story is about: reads picture books

• Interprets pictures to make up own story, that is, ‘reads’ the pictures

• Collects and reads logos and other words from environmental print

• Recognises own name and names of at least ten peers

• Reads labels and captions in the classroom

• Discusses book handling and care

• Listens to and discusses stories and other texts read aloud

• Develops basic concepts of print including:

• Concept of book - cover, front, back, title

• Concept of text - word, same words, letter, names of letters, one-to-one correspondence

• Directionality: starts reading at front, ends at back; reads from left to right and top to bottom of a page, first, last, middle
 words or letters or position on a page

• Punctuation: capital letter, lowercase letter, full stop, comma, question mark

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week; a teacher-modelled process
with the whole class.

Each session will have a learning focus from the following: concepts of print, text features, phonics, language
patterns, word identification strategies and comprehension at a range of levels using literal, reorganization, inferential,
evaluation and appreciation questions.

 56 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

• Reads as a whole class with the teacher enlarged texts such as poems, posters, big books and class stories developed in
 shared writing sessions

Group Guided Reading

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

The teacher works with same-ability groups of children, matching children to texts at the instructional level (word
recognition between 90 - 95% accuracy). Graded reading schemes will mostly be used.

• Reads aloud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the same story

• Begins to build a sight vocabulary from the incidental reading programme, graded reader series and high frequency word
 lists
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics: (oral and/or practical)

• Distinguishes aurally between different initial sounds of words

• Participates in whole class phonemic awareness activities: blending sounds (c-a-t into cat) ; segmenting words (cat into
 c-a-t); consonant and vowel substitution word play (replace the ‘h’ in hat with ‘b’ to make bat)

• Recognises and names some letters of the alphabet (2 vowels and at least 6 consonants)

• Begins to build up short words using sounds learnt(e.g. c-a-t - cat)

• Begins to use blending to make words such as ‘at’ c-at, m-at, identifying the rhymes

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of some single letters, for example, l, o, h, m, a, b, t, c. There should be 2 vowels and
 at least 6 consonants

• Begins to build up short words using sounds learnt (e.g. c-a-t - cat)

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading (oral and/or practical)

Emergent reading skills to be taught in Shared and Guided Reading lessons.

• Holds the book the right way up and turns pages correctly

• Interprets pictures to make up own story, that is, ‘reads’ the pictures

• Collects and reads logos and other words from environmental print

• Recognises own name and names of some peers

• Reads labels and captions in the classroom

• Discusses book handling and care

• Develops basic concepts of print including:

• Concept of book: cover, front, back, title

• Concept of text: word, some words, letter, names of some letters, one-to-one correspondence

• Directionality: starts reading at front, ends at back, reads from left to right and top to bottom of a page, first, last, middle
 words or letters or position on a page

• Punctuation: capital letter, lowercase letter, full stop, comma, question mark

Shared Reading

• Reads enlarged texts such as poems, big books, posters and electronic texts as a whole class with teacher

CAPS 57
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Group Guided Reading

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group works on the
 same story

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Emergent reading skills.

• Uses pictures to predict what the story is about. For example, reads picture books

• Listens to and discusses stories and other texts read aloud

Shared Reading

• Reads as a whole class with teacher enlarged texts such as poems, posters, big books and class stories developed in
 shared writing sessions

Group Guided Reading

• Reads aloud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the same story

 58 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 1
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal Lessons four times a week of 15 minutes

Activities to strengthen fine muscles and develop fine and gross motor skills and eye-hand co-ordination

• Draws with wax crayons

• Practises holding and manipulating crayon and pencil

• Develops directionality: left to right and top to bottom, draws straight lines, joins dots, clockwise and anti clockwise formations

• Makes plasticine or play dough models of letters and objects

• Develops hand-eye co-ordination through painting, paper tearing, cutting and tracing activities

• Draws patterns: up and down movements (zig-zags), circle patterns, vertical and horizontal patterns

• Traces over, copies and writes own name from template where the correct starting point and writing direction of individual
 letters are indicated

Development of letter formation in formal handwriting lessons

Align the order of teaching of the lower case letters to the phonics programme. Model correct letter formation and
 directionality. Children practise 2 letters per week, copying from writing strips. Check that children use the correct
 pencil grip. Use blank paper or unlined A4 jotters for written recording. Align the order of teaching the lower case
 letters to the phonics programme. Where possible, introduce the tracing and copying of the entire alphabet from
 the very beginning of the year, using alphabet strips where the correct starting points and writing direction are
 indicated.

• Forms lower case letters correctly (2 vowels and at least 6 consonants, e.g. l, o, h, m, a, b, t, c)

• Copies and writes own name, short words and sentences from labels, posters, chalkboard etc.

• Begins to express written recording with drawings, letters, numbers, words and simple sentences

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group / individual writing sessions three times a week for 15 minutes building on and linking to
 the Shared Reading, discussions and personal experiences

• Draws pictures to convey a message. For example, about a personal experience

• Writes a caption for a drawing or picture

• Writes words using letter sounds learnt

• Copies one sentence of news from the board/chart correctly

• Contributes ideas in Shared Writing for a class story recorded by the teacher on charts to create new texts for reading and
 display in the classroom reading corner

CAPS 59
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Draws with wax crayons

• Develops directionality: left to right and top to bottom, draws straight lines, join dots, clockwise and anti clockwise formations

• Traces over, copies and writes own name from template where the correct starting points and writing direction are indicated

• Copies and writes own name, short words and sentences from labels, posters, chalkboard etc.

• Begins to express written recording with drawings, letters, numbers, words and simple sentences

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Practises holding and manipulating crayon and pencil

• Draws patterns: up and down movements [zig-zags], circle patterns, vertical and horizontal patterns

• Forms lower case letters correctly: 2 vowels and at least 6 consonants - l, o, h, m, a, b, t, c

• Copies and writes own name, short words and sentences from labels, poster, chalkboard etc.

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities

Writing

• Draws pictures to convey a message. For example, about a personal experience

• Writes a caption for a drawing or picture

• Writes words using letter sounds learnt

• Copies one sentence of news from the board/chart correctly

• Contributes ideas in Shared Writing for a class story recorded by the teacher on charts to create new texts for reading and
 display in the classroom reading corner

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Draws pictures to convey a message. For example, about a personal experience

• Writes a caption for a drawing or picture

• Copies one sentence of news from the board/chart correctly

 60 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

• Listens without interrupting, taking turns to speak in whole class and group sessions

• Talks about personal experiences. For example, tells news using correct sequence

• Joins in the choruses of songs, stories, rhymes

• Says poems and rhymes and does the actions

• Identifies part from the whole such as parts of a bicycle, plant

Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities

Weeks 1 - 5

• Listens to instructions (group and daily routines) and responds appropriately

• Passes on messages

• Listens to stories with interest, drawing a picture to show understanding

• Answers closed and open-ended questions

Weeks 6 - 10

• Describes objects in terms of age, direction, sequence using correct vocabulary

• Listens to stories and identifies the main idea

• Sequences pictures of a story

• Participates in classroom discussions

• Asks questions related to stories told and read

• Understands and uses appropriate language of different subjects
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)

• Listens without interrupting, taking turns to speak in whole class and group sessions

• Talks about personal experiences. For example, tells news using correct sequence

• Joins in the choruses of songs, stories, rhymes

• Listens to instructions (group and daily routines) and responds appropriately

• Participates in classroom discussions

• Asks questions related to stories told and read

• Understands and uses appropriate language of different subjects

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Talks about personal experiences. For example, tells news using correct sequence

CAPS 61
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
• Listens to stories with interest, drawing a picture to show understanding

• Answers closed and open-ended questions

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Describes objects in terms of age, direction, sequence using correct vocabulary

• Listens to stories and identifies the main idea

• Sequences pictures of a story

 62 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily Phonemic Awareness/ Phonic Activities of 15 minutes

Teach the remainder of the single letters (3 vowels and 13 consonants) by the end of the term, continue with phonemic
 awareness and word building activities

• Distinguishes aurally between different beginning and end sounds of words

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of most single letters

• Participates in whole class phonemic awareness activities: blending sounds [h-op into hop]; segmenting words [hop into
 h-o-p]; consonant and vowel substitution word play [replace the ‘h’ in hop with ‘m’ to make mop]

• Builds words using sounds learnt ( -at, -et, -it, -ot, -ut, -ag, -eg, -ig, -og, -ug, -an, -en, -in, -un -am - at least two word families
 per week)

• Builds up and breaks down simple words beginning with a single consonant into onset (the initial sound) and rime (the last
 part of the syllable), e.g. h-en, p-en; t-in, p-in, identifying the rhymes

• Groups common words into sound families, e.g. hot, hop, hob

• Reads phonic words in sentences and other texts

Daily Reading Activities: Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week; a teacher-modelled process
with the whole class.

When reading, model the use of phonic decoding skills and other strategies that include context clues and structural
analysis. Refer to the Five Finger Strategy. Start teaching children this process when they meet unknown words.

• Reads big books or other enlarged texts as a whole class with teacher

• Uses pictures to predict what the story is about

• Interprets pictures to make up own story, that is, ‘reads’ the pictures

• Uses clues and pictures in the text for understanding

• Discusses the story, identifying the main idea in the text, the main characters etc.

• Answers a wide variety of types of questions based on the texts read including higher order type questions

• Discusses the use of capital letters and full stops

Group Guided Reading

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

The teacher works with same-ability groups of children, matching children to texts at the instructional level. Graded
reading schemes will mostly be used.

Teach children to monitor themselves when reading, both in the area of word recognition and comprehension.
(Children are taught to ask: ‘Does it sound right?’, ‘Does it look right?’ and ‘Does it make sense?’) Model the process
in Shared Reading and apply it in Guided Reading with support.

• Reads aloud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the same story

CAPS 63
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
• Uses phonics, context clues and sight words when reading

• Begins to monitor self when reading, both in the area of word recognition and comprehension

• Continues to build a sight vocabulary from the incidental reading programme, the graded reading series and high-frequency
 word lists

Paired/Independent Reading (twice a week in Language focus time)

Introduce Paired/Independent reading. Select texts that are at the independent reading level of the child (simpler than
 those used in Shared Reading with more than 95% word recognition accuracy when reading the text)

• Reads to a partner from prepared or known texts to develop fluency

• Rereads familiar texts such as those read in Shared Reading sessions
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics: (oral and/or practical)

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of all single sounds

• Participates in whole class phonemic awareness activities: blending sounds [h-op into hop];

segmenting words [hop into h-o-p]; consonant and vowel substitution word play [ replace the ‘h’ in hop by ‘m’ to make mop]

• Builds words using sounds learnt (e.g. -at, -et, -it, -ot, -ut, -ag, e.g. -ig, -og, -ug, -an, -en, -in,-un, -am - at least two word
 families per week)

• Builds up and breaks down simple words beginning with a single consonant into onset (the initial sound) and rime (the last
 part of the syllable) , e.g. h-en, p-en; t-in, p-in, identifying the rhymes

• Groups common words into sound families such as hot, hop, hob

• Reads phonic words in sentences and other texts

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Distinguishes aurally between different beginning and end sounds of words

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of most single letters

• Builds words using sounds learnt (e.g. -at, -et, -it, -ot, -ut, -ag, e.g., -ig, -og, -ug, -an, -en, -in, -un, -am - at least two word
 families per week)

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of most single letters

• Builds words using sounds learnt (e.g. -at, -et, -it, -ot, -ut, -ag, e.g. -ig, -og, -ug, -an, -en, -in, -un, -am - at least two word
 families per week

• Groups common words into sound families (e.g. hot, hop, hob)

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading (oral and/or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads with the whole class big books or other enlarged texts

• Uses clues and pictures in the text for understanding

• Discusses the story, identifying the main idea in the text, the main characters etc.

• Answers a wide variety of types of questions based on the texts read including higher order type questions

• Discusses the use of capital letters and full stops

 64 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Group Guided Reading:

• Reads aloud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the same story

• Begins to monitor self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

Paired/Independent Reading

• Reads to a partner from prepared or known texts to develop fluency

• Rereads familiar texts such as those read in Shared Reading sessions

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads with the whole class big books or other enlarged texts

• Uses pictures to predict what the story is about

• Uses clues and pictures in the text for understanding

• Discusses the story, identifying the main idea in the text, the main characters etc.

Group Guided Reading

• Reads aloud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the same story

• Uses phonics, context clues and sight words when reading

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads with the whole class big books or other enlarged texts

• Interprets pictures to make up own story, that is, ‘reads’ the pictures

• Uses clues and pictures in the text for understanding

• Answers a wide variety of types of questions based on the texts read including higher order type questions

Group Guided Reading

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group works on the
 same story

• Uses phonics, context clues and sight words when reading

CAPS 65
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal lessons four times a week of 15 minutes

Development of letter formation in formal handwriting lessons

Align the order of teaching of the lower case letters to the phonics programme. Model correct letter formation and
directionality. Child practises 2 letters per week, copying from writing strips so that, by the end of the term at least 20
lower case letters have been taught. Demonstrate the correct spacing of letters in a word and words in a sentence.
Towards the end of the term introduce the formation of frequently used capital letters (A, C, H, I, T, W). Use blank paper
or A4 unlined / 17 mm lined jotters for written recording.

• Holds pencil and crayon correctly

• Forms at least 20 lower case letters correctly according to size and position, that is, starts and ends in the correct place

• Forms some frequently used capital letters correctly (e.g. A, C, H, I, T, W)

• Writes words with correct spacing

• Writes and copies short, simple sentences from writing strip, chalkboard

In addition, continue activities that strengthen fine muscles and develop fine and gross motor skills and eye-hand
co-ordination. Ensure that children use the correct sitting position when they write.

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group / individual writing sessions three times a week for 15 minutes building on and linking to the
Shared Reading, discussions and personal experiences. Provide sentence starters and other support so that children
can begin writing their own news etc. Introduce the use of a personal dictionary.

• Draws pictures to convey a message, adding a label or caption. For example, about a personal experience

• Writes words using sounds learnt

• Writes one sentence of own news or shared writing

• Compiles a list of words according to instructions such as food

• Contributes ideas for a class story (Shared Writing)

• Writes and illustrates a caption or short sentence on a topic to contribute to a book for the reading corner

• Begins to build own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of words such as ant, book, cat

• Writes sentences using words containing the phonic sounds already taught

 66 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Holds pencil and crayon correctly

• Forms some frequently used capital letters correctly (e.g. A, C, H, I, T, W)

• Writes words with correct spacing

• Writes and copies short, simple sentences from writing strip, chalkboard

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Holds pencil and crayon correctly

• Forms at least 20 lower case letters correctly according to size and position, that is, starts and ends in the correct place

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Handwriting

• Forms at least 20 lower case letters correctly according to size and position i.e. starts and ends in the correct place

• Forms some frequently used capital letters correctly (e.g. A, C, H, I, T, W)

• Writes words with correct spacing

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing

• Writes sentences using words containing the phonic sounds already taught

• Writes one sentence of own news or shared writing

• Compiles a list of words according to instructions such as food

• Contributes ideas for a class story (Shared Writing)

• Begins to build own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of words (e.g. ant, book, cat)

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Draws pictures to convey a message, adding a label or caption, e.g. about a personal experience

• Writes sentences using words containing the phonic sounds already taught

• Contributes ideas for a class story (Shared Writing).

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Writing

• Draws pictures to convey a message, adding a label or caption, e.g. about a personal experience

• Writes one sentence of own news or shared writing

• Compiles a list of words according to instructions such as a list of words related to transport

CAPS 67
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of language and other subjects

• Listens to instructions and announcements and responds appropriately

• Listens without interrupting showing respect for the speaker

• Talks about personal experiences such as tells news using the correct sequence

• Says poems and rhymes and does the actions

• Understands and uses appropriate language of different subjects

Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities

Weeks 1 - 5

• Listens to a story with interest and enjoyment, drawing a picture and writing a caption about it

• Sequences pictures of a story and matches captions with the pictures

• Role plays different situations, using appropriate language

• Participates in discussions, asking and answering questions

Weeks 6 - 10

• Listens for the detail in stories and answers open-ended questions

• Identifies similarities and differences using correct vocabulary

• Uses an ever-increasing vocabulary when speaking
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Listening and Speaking: (oral and/ or practical)

• Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker

• Says poems and rhymes and does the actions

• Listens to a story with interest and enjoyment, drawing a picture and writing a caption about it

• Role plays different situations, using appropriate language

• Participates in discussions, asking and answering questions

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Talks about personal experiences such as tells news using the correct sequence

• Says poems and rhymes and does the actions

• Sequences pictures of a story and matches captions with the pictures

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Listens to instructions and announcements and responds appropriately

• Talks about personal experiences such as tells news using the correct sequence

• Listens for the detail in stories and answers open-ended questions

 68 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
Daily Phonic Activities of 15 minutes:
Revise the single letters and introduce common consonant blends and consonant digraphs. Continue word building
activities.
• Identifies letter-sound relationships of all single letters
• Revises word families using short vowel sounds learnt
• Builds 3-letter words using all single letters
• Uses consonant blends to build up and break down words (e.g. r and l blends- bl-ack, fl-op, sl-ip etc.)
• Recognises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch and th) at the beginning of a word (e.g. sh-ip, ch-ip, th-ink)
• Groups common words into sound families
• Reads phonic words in sentences and other texts
Daily Reading Activities: Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.
Shared Reading
Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week; a teacher-modelled process
with the whole class.
Demonstrate the Five Finger Strategy in Shared Reading and encourage children to use it in Guided and Independent
Reading.
• Reads big books or other enlarged texts as a whole class with teacher
• Identifies the sequence of events and the setting of the story
• Uses cover of book to predict ending and storyline
• Recognises cause and effect in a story (e.g. The boy fell off his bike because he rode too quickly down the steep hill.)
• Answers higher order questions based on the passage read (e.g. “Do you think…?” “Why did…?” )
• Gives an opinion on what was read
• Interprets information from posters, pictures and simple tables (e.g. calendar)
Group Guided Reading
The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.
• Reads aloud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the same story
• Uses phonics, context clues, and structural analysis and sight words when reading
• Monitors self when reading, both in the area of word recognition and comprehension
• Reads with increasing fluency and expression
• Continues to build a sight vocabulary from the incidental reading programme, the graded reading series and high-frequency
 word lists
Paired/Independent Reading (three times a week)
• Reads aloud to a partner
• Reads own and others writing
• Reads books read in Shared Reading sessions and books from the classroom reading corner

CAPS 69
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics: (oral and/or practical)

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of all single letters

• Uses consonant blends to build up and break down words (r and l blends, e.g. bl-ack, fl-op, sl-ip etc.)

• Recognises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch and th) at the beginning of a word (e.g. sh-ip, ch-ip, th-ink)

• Reads phonic words in sentences and other texts

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of all single letters

• Revises word families using short vowel sounds learnt (e.g. bus, mum, run, hip, hop etc.)

• Builds 3-letter words using all single letters

• Uses consonant blends to build up and break down words (e.g. r blends - cr-ack, dr-op, tr-ip etc. )

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Builds 3-letter words using all single letters

• Uses consonant blends to build up and break down words (e.g. l blends - bl-ack, fl-op, sl-ip)

• Recognises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch and th) at the beginning of a word (e.g. sh-ip, ch-ip, th-ink)

• Groups common words into sound families

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading (oral and/or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads big books or other enlarged texts as a whole class with teacher

• Answers higher order questions based on the passage read (e.g. “Do you think…?” “Why did…?” )

• Gives an opinion on what was read

• Recognises cause and effect in a story (e.g. The boy fell off his bike because he rode too quickly down the steep hill)

Group Guided Reading

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension.

Paired/Independent reading

• Reads books read in Shared Reading sessions and books from the classroom reading corner

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads big books or other enlarged texts as a whole class with teacher

• Identifies the sequence of events and the setting of the story

• Uses cover of book to predict ending and storyline

Group Guided Reading

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher i.e. whole group works on the same
 story

• Uses phonics, context clues, and structural analysis and sight words when reading

 70 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads big books or other enlarged texts as a whole class with teacher

• Identifies the sequence of events and the setting of the story

• Answers higher order questions based on the passage read (e.g. “Do you think…?” “Why did…?” )

• Interprets information from posters, pictures and simple tables such as calendar

Group Guided Reading

• Reads aloud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the same story

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression

Paired/Independent reading

• Reads aloud to a partner

CAPS 71
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
TERM 3
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal Lessons four times a week of 15 minutes

Revise the formation of lower case letters and continue to teach the capital letters and the numerals. Demonstrate the
correct spacing of letters in a word and words in a sentence.

• Holds pencil and crayon correctly

• Forms lower case letters correctly according to size and position, that is, starts and ends in the correct place automatically

• Forms frequently used upper case letters correctly (e.g. B, D, E, F, G, L, M, N, O, P, R, S, and Y)

• Forms numerals correctly

• Copies and writes words with correct spacing

• Copies and writes short sentences correctly

Shared, Group and Independent Writing:

Whole class / small group / individual writing sessions three times a week for 15 minutes building on and linking to
the Shared Reading, discussions and personal experiences.

Demonstrate the writing process (drafting, editing, writing and publishing) during Shared Writing. Model the use of
correct punctuation and writing in the past tense. Provide additional support to those children who still cannot write
a sentence of own news.

• Writes a message on a card such as a get well card

• Writes words to form a sentence using sounds learnt and common sight words

• Writes at least two sentences of own news or shared writing using the past tense

• Begins to use capital letters and full stops, including capital letters for names

• With help uses nouns and pronouns (I, you, she, he, it ) correctly in writing

• Contributes ideas and words for a class story in Shared Writing sessions

• Writes and illustrates a short sentence on a topic to contribute to a book for the reading corner

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of word such as cat, dog, eat
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Holds pencil and crayon correctly

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Forms lower case letters correctly according to size and position, that is, starts and ends in the correct place automatically

• Forms numerals correctly

• Copies and writes words with correct spacing

 72 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Handwriting

• Forms frequently used upper case letters correctly

• Copies and writes short sentences correctly

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing:

• Writes words to form a sentence using sounds learnt and common sight words

• Begins to use capital letters and full stops, including capital letters for names

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of word such as cat, dog, eat

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Writes words to form a sentence using sounds learnt and common sight words

• With help uses nouns and pronouns (I, you, she, he, it ) correctly in writing

• Contributes ideas and words for a class story in Shared Writing Session

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Writing

• Writes a message on a card such as a get well card

• Writes at least two sentences of own news or shared writing using the past tense

• Begins to use capital letters and full stops, including capital letters for names

• With help uses nouns and pronouns (I, you, she, he, it ) correctly in writing

CAPS 73
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 50 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of language and other subjects

• Listens without interrupting, taking turns to speak and asking questions for clarification.

• Talks about personal experiences and feelings such as tells news

• Listens to stories and expresses feelings about the story

• Uses terms such as sentence, capital letter, full stop

Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities

Weeks 1 - 5

• Listens, enjoys and responds to picture and word puzzles, riddles and jokes, using language imaginatively

• Participates in discussions, reporting back on behalf of the group

• Uses simple strategies for finding information. For example, carries out a survey on how children come to school

• Classifies information. For example, by using loose pictures

Weeks 6 - 10

• Listens to instructions and announcements and responds appropriately

• Tells a familiar story which has a beginning, middle and end, varying tone and volume of voice

• Answers closed and open-ended questions
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)

• Listens without interrupting, taking turns to speak and asking questions for clarification

• Listens to stories and expresses feelings about the story

• Uses terms such as sentence, capital letter, full stop

• Participates in discussions, reporting back on behalf of the group

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Talks about personal experiences and feelings (e.g. tells news)

• Listens to instructions and announcements and responds appropriately

• Tells a familiar story which has a beginning, middle and end, varying tone and volume of voice

• Answers closed and open-ended questions

 74 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily Phonic Activities of 15 minutes

Introduce new consonant blends. Continue word building and aural recognition activities.

• Revises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch and th) at the beginning of a word. For example, sh-ip, ch-ip, th-in

• Recognises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch and th) at the end of a word. For example, fi-sh, mu-ch, wi-th

• Uses consonant blends to build up and break down words. For example, sp-o-t, fr-o-g, dr-i-nk, st-i-ck

• Builds words using sounds learnt

• Groups common words into sound families

• Recognises plurals ( ‘s’ and ‘es’)

• Reads phonic words in sentences and other texts

• Learns to spell ten words a week taken from phonics lessons

Daily Reading Activities: Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and two to three Shared Reading sessions per
week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week; a teacher-modelled process
with the whole class.

• Reads as a whole class with teacher big books or other enlarged texts

• Uses book cover to predict what the book is about

• Identifies the initial problem in a story that sets the story in motion. In the story of the Three Bears the problem is the
 morning porridge is too hot and the bears leave their house and go for a walk

• Uses clues and pictures in the book for understanding

• Identifies the sequence of events in what was read

• Recognises cause and effect in a story. The girl got into trouble because she broke a window

• Answers open-ended questions based on the passage read

• Interprets information from posters

Group Guided Reading

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

• Reads aloud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the same story

• Uses phonics, context clues, structural analysis and sight words when reading

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

• Shows an understanding of punctuation when reading aloud

• Continues to build a sight vocabulary from the incidental reading programme, the graded reading series and high-frequency
 word lists

CAPS 75
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Paired/Independent Reading (three times a week)
Use books from Shared Reading sessions, simple picture story books and books from the reading corner as well as
own writing.
• Reads own writing, starting to correct errors
• Reads books read in Shared Reading sessions and books from the classroom reading corner
ASSESSMENT
Suggestions for Formal Assessment Activities :
Phonics: (oral and/or practical)
• Recognises plurals (e.g. ‘s’ and ‘es’)
• Revises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch and th) at the beginning of a word ( sh-ip, ch-ip, th-in)
• Reads phonic words in sentences and other texts
Formal Assessment Activity 1:
Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)
• Recognises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch and th) at the end of a word ( fi-sh, mu-ch, wi-th)
• Uses consonant blends to build up and break down words (sp-o-t, fr-o-g, dr-i-nk, st-i-ck)
• Builds words using sounds learnt
• Groups common words into sound families
Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :
Reading (oral and/or practical)
Shared Reading
• Uses book cover to predict what the book is about
• Identifies the initial problem in a story that sets the story in motion
• Uses clues and pictures in the book for understanding
• Interprets information from posters
Group Guided Reading
• Uses phonics, context clues, structural analysis and sight words when reading
• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension
• Shows an understanding of punctuation when reading aloud
Paired/Independent reading
• Reads own writing, starting to correct errors
Formal Assessment Activity 1:
Reading (oral and/ or practical)
Shared Reading
• Reads big books or other enlarged texts as a whole class with teacher
• Identifies the sequence of events in what was read
• Recognises cause and effect in a story. The girl got into trouble because she broke a window
• Answers open-ended questions based on the passage read
Group Guided Reading
• Reads aloud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the same story
• Uses phonics, context clues, structural analysis and sight words when reading
• Reads with increasing fluency and expression
Paired/Independent reading
• Reads books read in Shared Reading sessions and books from the classroom reading corner

 76 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 1 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal lessons four times a week of 15 minutes

Revise the formation of lower and upper case letters. Continue to teach the correct spacing of letters in a word and
words in a sentence as children copy words and sentences from the chalkboard and from sentence strips.

• Holds pencil and crayon correctly

• Forms lower and upper case letters correctly and fluently according to size and position, that is, starts and ends in the
 correct place

• Copies and writes words with correct spacing

• Copies and writes a sentence correctly

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group / individual writing sessions three times a week for 15 minutes building on and linking to
the Shared Reading, discussions and personal experiences. Use the Shared Writing activities to also model the use
of correct punctuation, spelling and grammar (tenses, plurals, prepositions).

• Contributes ideas for and helps to revise a class/group story (Shared Writing)

• Discusses with classmates ideas for writing

• Writes at least three sentences of own news or creative story using sounds learnt and common sight words, capital letters
 and full stops

• Writes and illustrates sentences on a topic to contribute to a book for the reading corner

• Spells common words correctly

• Begins to use present and past tense correctly in writing

• Forms the plurals of familiar words by adding ‘s’ or ‘es’

• Uses prepositions correctly

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of word. For example, far, good, hat

• Organises information into a simple graphic form such as chart or timeline, e.g. uses a chart to record the results of a survey
 on how children come to school
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Holds pencil and crayon correctly

• Forms lower and upper case letters correctly and fluently according to size and position, that is, starts and ends in the
 correct place

• Copies and writes a sentence correctly

CAPS 77
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Forms lower and upper case letters correctly and fluently according to size and position, that is, starts and ends in the
 correct place

• Copies and writes words with correct spacing

• Copies and writes a sentence correctly

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing

• Contributes ideas for and helps to revise a class/group story (Shared Writing)

• Discusses with classmates ideas for writing

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of word. For example, far, good, hat

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Writes at least three sentences of own news or creative story using sounds learnt and common sight words, capital letters
 and full stops

• Spells common words correctly

• Begins to use present and past tense correctly in writing

• Forms the plurals of familiar words by adding ‘s’ or ‘es’

• Uses prepositions correctly

• Organises information into a simple graphic form using a chart or timeline, e.g., uses a chart to record the results of a survey
 on how children come to school

 78 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
RECOMMENDED TEXTS/RESOURCES FOR THE YEAR

LISTENING AND SPEAKING

• Pictures and posters

• Objects related to the themes and topics, puppets, masks etc.

• Story board pieces, jig-saws, tangrams and matching puzzles

• Pictures to sequence

• Improvised costumes for role-play

• Musical instruments (tambourine, percussion sets etc.)

• CD s or tapes with stories (read or told), poems, rhymes and songs, CD player or tape recorder, television and video tapes/
 DVDs

• Storybooks and oral stories

• Poems, songs and rhymes
READING AND PHONICS

• Pictures and posters

• Phonic wall charts

• Logos and relevant examples of environmental print such as shopping bags, brand names on packaging etc.

• Graded reading scheme/s

• Big books - some produced in Shared Writing sessions

• Nursery rhymes, poems and songs

• Other enlarged texts such as poems, songs, rhymes etc.

• Story books and picture books for the reading corner

• Short ‘fun’ books with 1-2 sentences on a page for the reading corner

• Flash card labels for classroom items, displays and for sight words

• Name cards for children

• Pointers to use when reading enlarged texts, wall stories, displays
WRITING AND HANDWRITING

• Apparatus and materials for hand-eye co-ordination activities: balls of various sizes, hoops, bean bags, scissors, plasticine
 or play dough, pegboards and pegs, beads and laces, lacing cards and laces, nuts and bolts, clothes pegs, sand tray)

• Writing materials, e.g., pencils, coloured pencils, wax crayons, paint, paintbrushes, blank paper in various sizes (A3, A4,
 A5), ruler, eraser, blank jotters, 17mm lined jotters

• Writing and sentence strips or charts (desk sized) indicating starting points and correct direction of movement when writing
 letters

• Flipchart paper and thick Koki pens

• Personal dictionaries

CAPS 79
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
3.3 GRADE 2

 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 1
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

 • Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker

 • Takes turns to speak

 • Talks about personal experiences. For example, tells personal news

 • Uses correct words for the context such as an invitation

 • Suggests solutions to a problem especially during Mathematics

 Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities

 Weeks 1 - 5

 • Listens to a story with enjoyment and answers questions related to the story

 • Repeats a sequence of events in the story correctly

 • Listens to instructions containing at least two parts and responds appropriately

 Weeks 6 - 10

 • Tells a story that has a beginning, middle and end

 • Participates in discussions, asking and answering questions and suggesting ideas
 ASSESSMENT

 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

 Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)

 • Repeats a sequence of events in the story correctly

 • Participates in discussions, asking and answering questions and suggesting ideas

 Formal Assessment Activity 1:

 Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

 • Talks about personal experiences. For example, tells personal news

 • Listens to instructions containing at least two parts and responds appropriately

 • Listens to a story with enjoyment and answers questions related to the story

 • Tells a story that has a beginning, middle and end

 80 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 1
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily Phonic Activities of 15 minutes:

Revise the single letters and consonant digraphs taught in Grade 1. Introduce common vowel digraphs. Simultaneously
work on word building and aural recognition activities. Use opportunities to revise the phonics being taught in other
Language activities, for example in Shared Reading and Shared Writing.

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of all single letters

• Revises word families with short vowel sounds: -at ,-ag, -am, -it, etc.

• Revises common consonant digraphs: sh, ch, th

• Recognises ‘wh’ at the beginning of a word such as wh-en, wh-y, wh-at, etc.

• Uses initial and final consonant blends to build up and break down words such as bl-a-ck, bri-ng, sa-ng

• Revises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch, th) at the end of words such as fi-sh, ri-ch, clo-th

• Recognises vowel digraphs such as ‘oo’ as in moon and ‘ee’ as in tree

• Recognises rhyming words such as rack, sack, back, lack, pack

• Builds 3 and 4-letter words using the single letters and digraphs taught this term

• Reads words from phonics lessons in sentences and other texts

• Learns to spell ten words a week taken from phonics lessons

Daily Reading Activities

Group guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week; a teacher-modelled process
with the whole class.

Each session will have a learning focus from the following: concepts of print, text features, phonics, language
patterns, word identification strategies and comprehension at a range of levels (e.g. literal, reorganisation, inferential,
evaluation and appreciation). Model the use of phonic decoding skills when reading and other strategies that include
context clues and structural analysis.

Model the five finger strategy where each finger represents a strategy the reader can use to systematically figure out
how to read an unknown word and its meaning.

• Reads simple instructions in the classroom

• Interprets pictures and other print media such as a photograph or an advertisement, to make up own story. ‘Reads’ the
 photograph or advertisement

• Reads books as a whole class with teacher (shared reading) and describes the main ideas

• Uses visual cues to predict what the story is about: the cover of the book, illustrations in the book

• Expresses a personal response to a text read

• Identifies key details in what was read such as the sequence of events

• Answers higher order questions before, during and after reading a shared text: . “What would happen if…”

CAPS 81
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Group Guided Reading

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

The teacher works with same-ability groups of children, matching children to texts at the instructional level (word
recognition between 90 - 95% accuracy). Graded reading schemes will mostly be used.

• Reads both silently and aloud at own level in a Guided Reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads same story
 based on the instructional reading level of the group

• Uses pictures in text for understanding

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

• Shows an understanding of punctuation (full stops, commas, question marks and exclamation marks) when reading aloud

• Continues to build a sight vocabulary from the incidental reading programme, the graded reading series and high-frequency
 word lists

Paired/Independent Reading (three times a week)

Introduce Paired/Independent reading. Select texts that are known or are at the independent reading level of the child
(simpler than those used in shared reading with more than 95% word recognition accuracy when reading the text)

• Reads independently: picture books, poetry cards, story books from the library or classroom reading corner
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics (oral and/or practical)

• Revises word families with short vowel sounds: -at, -ag, -am, -it etc.

• Recognises rhyming words: rack, sack, back, lack, pack

• Builds 3 and 4-letter words using the single letters and digraphs taught this term

• Reads words from phonics lessons in sentences and other texts

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of all single letters

• Revises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch, th)

• Recognises ‘wh’ at the beginning of a word such as wh-en, wh-y, wh-at etc.

• Uses initial and final consonant blends to build up and break down words such as bl-a-ck, bri-ng, sa-ng

• Revises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch, th) at the end of words such as fi-sh, ri-ch, clo-th

• Recognises vowel digraphs such as ‘oo’ as in moon and ‘ee’ as in tree

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading (oral and/or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads simple instructions in the classroom

• Interprets pictures and other print media such as a photograph or an advertisement, to make up own story. ‘Reads’ the
 photograph or advertisement

• Reads books as a whole class with teacher (shared reading) and describes the main ideas

• Uses visual cues i.e. the cover of a book to predict what the story is about, expressing a personal response

• Identifies key details in what was read such as the sequence of events

• Answers higher order questions before, during and after reading a shared text: “What would happen if…”

 82 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Group Guided Reading

• Reads both silently and aloud at own level in a Guided Reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads same story
 based on the instructional reading level of the group

• Uses pictures in text for understanding

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

• Shows an understanding of punctuation (full stops, commas, question marks and exclamation marks) when reading aloud

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Interprets pictures and other print media such as a photograph or an advertisement, to make up own story. ‘Reads’ the
 photograph or advertisement

• Reads books as a whole class with teacher (shared reading) and describes the main ideas

• Uses visual cues i.e. the cover of a book to predict what the story is about, expressing a personal response

• Identifies key details in what was read such as the sequence of events

Group Guided Reading

• Reads aloud at own level in a Guided Reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads same story based on the
 instructional reading level of the group

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

CAPS 83
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 1
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time:1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal lessons three times a week of 15 minutes

Revise the formation of lower and upper case letters, the correct spacing of letters in a word and words in a sentence.
Children copy words and sentences from the chalkboard and from sentence strips.

• Holds pencil and positions writing materials (book/page) correctly

• Forms 26 lower and upper case letters correctly: directionality, formation and spacing within lines

• Writes words with correct spacing between letters and words

• Copies and writes two or more sentences legibly and correctly

• Writes and uses punctuation marks (full stops, question marks, commas, exclamation marks)

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group lessons two to three times a week for 20 minutes building on and linking to the Shared
Reading. Use the Shared Writing activities to also model the use of correct punctuation and spelling. Use sentence
starters to assist children to write their own sentences. Introduce personal dictionaries.

• Draws pictures to convey a message such as about a personal experience

• Contributes ideas and words for a class story (Shared Writing)

• Writes a list using a comma to separate the items such as tasks for the day

• Writes at least three sentences of own news or creative story using sounds learned and common sight words, capital letters
 and full stops

• Writes and illustrates sentences (2 - 4 sentences) on a topic to contribute to a book for the classroom reading corner

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of word to develop dictionary skills such as car, door
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Holds pencil and positions writing materials (book/page) correctly

• Forms 26 lower and upper case letters correctly: directionality, formation and spacing within lines

• Writes and uses punctuation marks: full stops, question marks, commas, exclamation marks

• Writes words with correct spacing between letters and words

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Forms 26 lower and upper case letters correctly - directionality, formation and spacing within lines

• Copies and writes two or more sentences legibly and correctly

 84 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing

• Writes a list using a comma to separate the items such as tasks for the day

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of word to develop dictionary skills ; identifies correct page
 for noting words such as car, door

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Draws pictures to convey a message, e.g., about a personal experience

• Writes at least three sentences of own news or creative story using sounds learned and common sight words, capital letters
 and full stops

• Contributes ideas and words for a class story (Shared Writing)

CAPS 85
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects
• Listens without interrupting showing respect for the speaker
• Takes turns to talk, showing sensitivity to others and giving positive feedback
• Talks about personal experiences. For example, tells news without repetition
• Understands and uses appropriate language of different subjects such as language specific to Mathematics
• Suggests solutions to a problem especially during Mathematics
Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities
Weeks 1 - 5
• Listens to stories for a longer period with enjoyment
• Expresses feelings about a story or poem
• Identifies similarities and differences
• Compares and classifies things explaining classification such as animals with 4 legs and those with 2 legs
Weeks 6 - 10
• Listens to more complex instructions and responds appropriately
• Listens to stories and poems and identifies the main idea, details and sequence of events
• Answers closed and open-ended questions and gives reasons for answers
• Responds to riddles and jokes
• Makes up own rhymes using imaginative language
• Participates in discussions and asks questions for clarity
ASSESSMENT
Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities:
Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)
• Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker
• Takes turns to talk, showing sensitivity to others and giving positive feedback
• Identifies similarities and differences
• Compares and classifies things explaining classification (e.g. animals with 4 legs and those with 2 legs)
Formal Assessment Activity 1:
Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)
• Talks about personal experiences. For example, tells news without repetition
• Listens to stories for a longer period with enjoyment
• Expresses feelings about a story or poem
Formal Assessment Activity 2:
Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)
• Listens to stories and poems and identifies the main idea, details and sequence of events
• Answers closed and open-ended questions and gives reasons for answers
• Participates in discussions and asks questions for clarity

 86 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily Phonic Activities of 15 minutes

Introduce 3 new vowel digraphs, silent ‘e’ and 3-letter consonant blends. Continue word building and aural recognition
activities. Ensure that children understand the words they are sounding and can use them to form meaningful
sentences.

• Recognises 3-letter consonant blends at the beginning of words. For example str-ip, str-ap

• Recognises 3-letter consonant blends at the end of words For example. ca-tch, fe-tch, i-tch

• Recognises at least 3 new vowel digraphs For example ‘oa’ as in boat, ‘ea’ as in eat, short ‘oo’ as in book, ‘ai’ as in ‘rain’

• Recognises ‘silent e’/split digraph in words For example tape, time, note

• Builds 3, 4 and 5-letter words using the consonant blends, vowel digraphs taught this term.

• Reads words from phonics lessons in sentences and other texts

• Learns to spell ten words a week taken from phonics lessons

Daily Reading Activities

Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week; a teacher-modelled process
with the whole class.

Model the use of phonic decoding skills and other strategies that include context clues and structural analysis.

• Uses visual cues to identify the purpose of advertisements and the intended audience

• Reads book as a whole class with teacher (shared reading) and discusses cause-effect relations

• Identifies key details in what was read such as main characters and setting

• Reads well-known nursery rhymes, poems and songs as a whole class with teacher (shared reading) and discusses the
 different formats

• Answers higher order questions based on the text read. “How is the lion’s behaviour different from that of the mouse?”

• Gives an opinion on what was read

Group Guided Reading

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

Teach children to monitor themselves when reading, both in the area of word recognition and comprehension.
(Children taught to ask: ‘Does it sound right?’, ‘Does it look right?’ and ‘Does it make sense?’) Model the process in
Shared Reading and apply it in Guided Reading with support.

• Reads aloud from book at own level in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads same story

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

• Begins to monitor self when reading, both recognition and comprehension

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression

CAPS 87
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
• Continues to build a sight vocabulary from the incidental reading programme, the graded reading series and high-frequency
 word lists

Paired/Independent Reading

Daily reading related activities for 20 minutes while some groups are doing guided reading with the teacher.

• Reads aloud to a partner

• Reads own and others’ writing

• Reads independently texts such as comics and simple fiction books
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics: (oral and/or practical)

• Reads words from phonics lessons in sentences and other texts

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises 3-letter consonant blends at the beginning of words. For example . str-ip, str-ap)

• Recognises 3-letter consonant blends at the end of words. For example ca-tch, fe-tch, i-tch)

• Builds 3, 4 and 5-letter words using the consonant blends, vowel digraphs taught this term

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises at least 3 new vowel digraphs. For example ‘oa’ as in boat, ‘ea’ as in eat, short ‘oo’ as in book, ‘ai’ as in ‘rain’

• Recognises ‘silent e’/split digraph in words . For example tape, time, note

• Builds 3, 4 and 5-letter words using the consonant blends, vowel digraphs taught this term

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading: (oral and/or practical)

Shared Reading

• Uses visual cues to identify the purpose of advertisements and the intended audience

• Answers higher order questions based on the text read. “How is the lion’s behaviour different from that of the mouse?”

Group Guided Reading

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression

• Begins to monitor self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

Paired/Independent Reading

• Reads own and others’ writing

• Reads independently texts such as comics and simple fiction books

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads book as a whole class with teacher (shared reading) and discusses cause effect relations

• Identifies key details in what was read such as main characters and setting

Group Guided Reading

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression

 88 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Paired/Independent Reading

• Reads independently texts such as comics and simple fiction books

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Uses visual cues to identify the purpose of advertisements and the intended audience

• Reads book as a whole class with teacher (shared reading) and discusses cause effect relations

• Answers higher order questions based on the text read. “How is the lion’s behaviour different from that of the mouse?”

• Gives an opinion on what was read

Group Guided Reading

• Reads aloud from book at own level in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads same story

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

Paired/Independent Reading

• Reads aloud to a partner

CAPS 89
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal lessons three times a week of 15 minutes

Children use print script to copy and write longer and more varied pieces of writing neatly and correctly from a printed
text.

• Writes in print script all capitals and lower case letters confidently and accurately

• Uses appropriate spacing between words in a sentence.

• Aligns writing properly on 17 mm ruled lines

• Copies and writes one paragraph of between 3 - 4 lines from a printed text (a story, a poem etc)

• Copies and writes different formats of writing (short invitations such as birthday; messages; lists etc)

• Draws patterns in preparation for a joined script or cursive writing

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group lessons two to three times a week for 20 minutes. Use the Shared Writing activities to model
the use of correct punctuation and spelling. Provide a writing frame to assist children to write their own stories.

• Participates in a discussion to choose a topic to write about

• Writes an expressive text such as a thank you card or letter using a given format

• Writes own story of at least one paragraph (at least five sentences) using a writing frame

• Writes one paragraph (at least five sentences) on personal experiences or events such as daily news

• Writes and illustrates sentences (4 - 6 sentences) on a topic to contribute to a book for the reading corner

• Uses the writing process (drafting, writing and editing)

• Uses capital letters (at the beginning of a sentence and for proper names) and correct punctuation (full stops, commas,
 question marks, exclamation marks)

• Begins to spell common words correctly

• Uses present and past tenses correctly

• Uses prepositions correctly

• Reads own writing to a partner

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of word to develop dictionary skills such as far, granny,
 home

 90 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Uses appropriate spacing between words in a sentence

• Aligns writing properly on 17 mm ruled lines

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Writes in print script all capitals and lower case letters confidently and accurately

• Copies and writes different formats of writing such as short birthday invitations, messages, lists etc.

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Handwriting

• Writes in print script all capitals and lower case letters confidently and accurately

• Copies and writes one paragraph of between 3 - 4 lines from a printed text such as a story, a poem etc.

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing:

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of word to develop dictionary skills such as far, granny,
 home

• Begins to spell common words correctly

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Writes an expressive text such as a thank you card or letter

• Participates in a discussion to choose a topic to write about

• Writes own story of at least one paragraph (at least 5 sentences) using a writing frame

• Uses capital letters (at the beginning of a sentence and for proper names) and correct punctuation (full stops, commas,
 question marks, exclamation marks)

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Writing

• Writes own story of at least one paragraph (at least five sentences) using a writing frame

• Writes one paragraph (at least five sentences) on personal experiences or events such as daily news

• Uses the writing process (drafting, writing, editing and publishing)

• Begins to spell common words correctly

• Uses present and past tenses correctly

• Reads own writing to a partner

CAPS 91
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects
• Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker and asking questions for clarification
• Talks about personal experiences and more general news, e.g., tells news
• Uses an ever-increasing vocabulary when speaking
• Participates in discussions, asking and answering questions
• Suggests solutions to a problem especially during Mathematics
Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities
Weeks 1 - 5
• Listens to a sequence of instructions and responds appropriately
• Listens to stories and predicts the ending, or makes up own ending for the story
• Tells simple stories varying tone and volume of voice
Weeks 6 - 10
• Listens for the detail in stories and answers open-ended questions. For example, works out cause and effect
• Role plays different situations, e.g., takes on the role of news presenter
• Uses appropriate language with different people such as interviews different people
• Tells jokes and riddles using language imaginatively
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)

• Listens without interrupting showing respect for the speaker and asking questions for clarification

• Talks about personal experiences and more general news. For example, tells news

• Uses appropriate language with different people such as interviews different people

• Tells jokes and riddles using language imaginatively

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Talks about personal experiences and more general news. For example, tells news

• Uses an ever-increasing vocabulary when speaking

• Listens to stories and predicts the ending, or makes up own ending for the story

• Tells simple stories varying tone and volume of voice

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Participates in discussions, asking and answering questions

• Listens to a sequence of instructions and responds appropriately

• Listens for the detail in stories and answers open-ended questions. For example, works out cause and effect

• Role plays different situations, e.g., takes on the role of news presenter

 92 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily Phonic Activities of 15 minutes:

Use consonant blends and digraphs to build up and break down words. Continue aural recognition activities
(building up and breaking down words aurally and not visually) as this is an aid to spelling.

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of all single letters

• Uses consonant blends to build up and break down words

• Aurally revises plurals (‘s’ and ‘es’), ‘ing’ and ‘ed’ at the end of words

• Revises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch, th) at the end of words (e.g. ca-sh, su-ch, mo-th)

• Recognises common double consonants such as ll, ss and zz) at the end of words such as do-ll, fu-ss, buzz

• Recognises the first sound (onset) and the last syllable (rime) in more complex patterns
 such as. dr-eam, cr-eam, scr-eam, str-eam

• Recognises vowel digraphs and diphthongs such as ‘oy’, ‘oi’, ‘ay’, ‘ai’

• Builds words using the consonant and vowel digraphs, consonant blends and double consonants taught this year

• Groups common words into sound families such as ‘oy’, ‘oi’; ‘ay’, ‘ai’

• Reads words from phonics lessons in sentences and other texts

• Learns to spell ten words a week taken from phonics lessons and sight words

Daily Reading Activities: Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week.

• Reads book as a whole class with teacher, identifying the sequence of events and the setting

• Uses the cover of a book for prediction

• Answers higher order questions based on the text read (“What would have happened if…?”)

• Gives an opinion on what was read

• Identifies some synonyms and antonyms

• Interprets information from simple tables such as calendar

Group Guided Reading

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

• Reads aloud from book at own level in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads same story

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension.

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression

• Continues to build a sight vocabulary from the incidental reading programme, the graded reading series and high-
 frequency word lists

CAPS 93
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Paired/Independent reading

Daily reading related activities for 20 minutes while some groups are doing guided reading with the teacher.

• Reads aloud to a partner

• Reads own and others’ writing

• Reads independently: short fiction books and poems

• Plays reading games and completes crosswords to reinforce reading and vocabulary skills such as bingo, track games
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics: (oral and/or practical)

• Identifies letter-sound relationships of all single letters

• Builds words using the consonant and vowel digraphs, consonant blends and double consonants taught this year

• Aurally revises plurals (‘s’ and ‘es’), ‘ing’ and ‘ed’ at the end of words

• Reads words from phonics lessons in sentences and other texts

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Uses consonant blends to build up and break down words

• Revises common consonant digraphs (sh, ch, th) at the end of words such as. ca-sh, su-ch, mo-th

• Recognises common double consonants such as ll, ss and zz at the end of words. For example do-ll, fu-ss, buzz

• Builds words using the consonant and vowel digraphs, consonant blends and double consonants taught this term

• Groups common words into sound families. For example ‘oy’, ‘oi’, ‘ay’, ‘ai’

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises the first sound (onset) and the last syllable (rime) in more complex patterns. For example dr-eam, cr-eam,
 scr-eam, str-eam

• Recognises vowel digraphs and diphthongs For example ‘oy’, ‘oi’, ‘ay’, ‘ai’

• Builds words using the consonant and vowel digraphs, consonant blends and double consonants taught this year

• Groups common words into sound families such as. ‘oy’, ‘oi’, ‘ay’, ‘ai’

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading (oral and/or practical)

Shared Reading

• Answers higher order questions based on the text read. For example “What would have happened if…?”

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

• Identifies some synonyms and antonyms

Group Guided Reading

• Reads aloud from book at own level in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads same story

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression

 94 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Paired/Independent reading

• Reads aloud to a partner

• Reads own and others’ writing

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads book as a whole class with teacher, identifying the sequence of events and the setting

• Uses the cover of a book for prediction

• Gives an opinion on what was read

Group Guided Reading:

• Reads aloud from book at own level in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads same story

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads book as a whole class with teacher, identifying the sequence of events and the setting

• Answers higher order questions based on the passage read. For example “What would have happened if…?”

• Interprets information from simple tables such as calendar

Group Guided Reading

• Reads aloud from book at own level in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads same story

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression

Paired/Independent reading

• Reads independently: short fiction books and poems

CAPS 95
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal lessons three times a week of 15 minutes

Children continue to use print script in written recording but begin to learn a type of joined print script. The type of
joined script or cursive writing will be informed by the school’s handwriting policy/Provincial Policy

Maintenance of the print script

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

• Forms upper and lower case letters correctly and with greater speed and accuracy

• Maintains uniformity and alignment: size of lower case and upper case letters in a word

• Uses print script in all forms of written recording

Transition to a joined script or cursive writing

• Copies and writes writing patterns in joined script or cursive writing

• Copies and writes at least two letters of joined script or cursive writing per week (size and uniformity)

• Copies and writes short words in joined script or cursive writing: 2 and 3 letter words such as an; am; at; it; in; on; of; he;
 we; us; be; so; see; can; our

• Recognises and reads short words written in the joined script or cursive writing

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group lessons two to three times a week for 20 minutes. Use the Shared Writing activities to
model the writing process (drafting, writing and publishing). Provide a writing frame to assist children to write their
own stories.

• Participates in a discussion to choose a topic to write about

• Writes an expressive text such as get well card, post card etc.

• Drafts, writes and publishes own story of at least six sentences

• Writes 1-2 paragraphs (at least eight sentences) on personal experiences or events

• Uses correct punctuation (full stops, commas, question marks and exclamation marks) so that others can read what has
 been written

• Spells common words correctly and attempts to spell unfamiliar words using phonic knowledge

• Uses present, past and future tenses correctly

• Identifies and uses nouns and verbs correctly

• Identifies and uses pronouns correctly

• Reads and discusses own writing with a partner

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary

 96 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

Maintenance of the print script

• Forms upper and lower case letters correctly and with greater speed and accuracy

Transition to a joined script or cursive writing

• Copies and writes writing patterns in joined script or cursive writing

• Copies and writes at least two letters of joined script or cursive writing per week (size and uniformity)

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Handwriting

Transition to a joined script or cursive writing

• Copies and writes at least two letters of joined script or cursive writing per week (size and uniformity)

• Copies and writes short words in joined script or cursive writing: 2 and 3 letter words such as an; am; at; it; in; on; of; he;
 we; us; be; so; see; can; our

• Recognises and reads short words written in the joined script or cursive writing

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing:

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary

• Identifies and uses nouns and verbs correctly

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Writes an expressive text such as get well card, post card etc.

• Writes 1-2 paragraphs (at least eight sentences) on personal experiences or events

• Spells common words correctly and attempts to spell unfamiliar words using phonic knowledge

• Uses present, past and future tenses correctly

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Writing

• Participates in a discussion to choose a topic to write about

• Drafts, writes and publishes own story of at least six sentences and adds a suitable title

• Uses correct punctuation (full stops, commas, question marks and exclamation marks) so that others can read what has
 been written

• Identifies and uses pronouns correctly

• Reads and discusses own writing with a partne

CAPS 97
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
 SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS
Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects
• Listens without interrupting, asking questions for clarification and commenting on what was heard
• Talks about personal experiences and more general news. For example, tells news using descriptive language
• Uses terms such as noun, adjective, verb, pronoun, preposition, comma, question mark, paragraph when talking about own
 writing
• Understands and uses appropriate language of different subjects
• Suggests solutions to a problem especially during Mathematics
Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities
Weeks 1 - 5
• Listens to a complex sequence of instructions and responds appropriately
• Participates in discussions, suggesting topics for discussion and asking questions for information and reporting back on
 the group’s work
• Participates in playing word games such as I spy…
• Tells jokes and riddles using appropriate volume and intonation
Weeks 6 - 10
• Listens and responds to a speaker the child cannot see
• Listens for the detail in stories and answers higher-order questions, e.g., “Do you think he was right to…?”
• Answers open-ended questions and justifies answer, e.g., “Why do you say that?”
• Expresses feelings about a text and gives reasons, e.g., “It made me angry because…”
ASSESSMENT
Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :
Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)
• Listens without interrupting, asking questions for clarification and commenting on what was heard
• Uses terms such as noun, adjective, verb, pronoun, preposition, comma, question mark, paragraph when talking about own
 writing
• Suggests solutions to a problem especially during Mathematics
• Participates in playing word games such as I spy…
• Tells jokes and riddles using appropriate volume and intonation
• Answers open-ended questions and justifies answer, e.g., “Why do you say that?”
Formal Assessment Activity 1:
Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)
• Talks about personal experiences and more general news. For example, tells news using descriptive language
• Listens to a complex sequence of instructions and responds appropriately
• Participates in discussions, suggesting topics for discussion and asking questions for information and reporting back on
 the group’s work
• Listens for the detail in stories and answers higher-order questions, e.g., “Do you think he was right to…?”
• Expresses feelings about a text and gives reasons, e.g., “It made me angry because…”

 98 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily Phonic Activities of 15 minutes

Introduce new vowel digraphs, diphthongs and blends. Ensure that children understand the words they are sounding
and can use them to form meaningful sentences. Guide children to use their phonic knowledge to spell unfamiliar
words.

• Recognises at least 5 new vowel digraphs (e.g. ‘ar’ as in car, ‘er’ as in fern, ‘ir’ as in shirt, ‘or’ as in short, ‘ur’ as in church
 etc.)

• Recognises vowel digraphs and diphthongs (e.g. ‘oa’, ‘oe’, ’ow’ as in ‘cow’ and ‘ow’ as in ‘show’)

• Recognises and uses suffixes (e.g. -ly, -ies)

• Revises ‘silent e’/ split digraph in words (e.g. cake, time, hope)

• Builds words using the phonic sounds taught during the year

• Builds sentences using phonics vocabulary

• Reads words from phonics lessons in sentences and other texts

• Learns to spell ten words a week taken from phonics lessons and sight words

• Writes two short sentences dictated by teacher

Daily Reading Activities

Guided Reading (two groups per day) and two to three Shared Reading sessions per week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week.

• Reads poems and songs as a whole class with teacher (Shared Reading) and discusses the different formats and the poet’s
 choice of words

• Reads fiction and non-fiction books as a whole class with teacher

• Answers higher order questions based on the text read, e.g., “In your opinion…”

• Expresses whether a story was liked and is able to justify the response, e.g., “I didn’t enjoy the story because…”

• Expresses a personal response to print media images such as newspaper and magazine pictures, posters, advertisements,
 e.g., “I preferred that magazine picture because this advert made me…”

• Recognises apostrophes in contractions showing both possession and contractions such as John’s car, don’t

Group Guided Reading

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

• Reads silently and aloud from fiction and non-fiction books at own level in a guided reading group with teacher, that is,
 whole group reads same text

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills and comprehension skills to make meaning

• Reads with increasing fluency and speed using correct pronunciation

CAPS 99
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
• Uses self-correcting strategies when reading: re-reading, pausing, practising a word before saying it aloud

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

• Continues to build a sight vocabulary from the incidental reading programme, the graded reading series and high-frequency
 word lists

Paired/Independent reading:

Daily reading related activities for 20 minutes while some groups are doing guided reading with the teacher.

• Reads own and others’ writing

• Reads aloud to a partner

• Reads independently at a more complex level for enjoyment or information from a variety of available texts: comics, simple
 fiction and non-fiction books

• Plays reading games such as reading dominoes, and completes crosswords to reinforce reading and vocabulary skills
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Formal Assessment Activities :

Phonics: (oral and/or practical)

• Recognises and uses suffixes such as -ly, -ies

• Revises ‘silent e’/ split digraph in words such as cake, time, hope

• Builds sentences using phonics vocabulary

• Reads words from phonics lessons in sentences and other texts

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises at least 5 new vowel digraphs. For example ‘ar’ as in car, ‘er’ as in fern, ‘ir’ as in shirt, ‘or’ as in short, ‘ur’ as in
 church etc.

• Recognises vowel digraphs and diphthongs. For example ‘oa’, ‘oe’, ’ow’ as in ‘cow’ and ‘ow’ as in ‘show’)

• Builds words using the phonic sounds taught during the year

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading: (oral and/or practical)

Shared Reading

• Answers higher order questions based on the text read, e.g., “In your opinion…?”

• Expresses whether a story was liked and is able to justify the response, e.g., “I didn’t enjoy the story because…”

Group Guided Reading:

• Uses self-correcting strategies when reading: re-reading, pausing, practising a word before saying it aloud

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension.

Paired/Independent reading

• Reads own and others’ writing

• Reads aloud to a partner

 100 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical)

Shared Reading

• Reads fiction and non-fiction books as a whole class with teacher

• Answers higher order questions based on the text read, e.g., “In your opinion…?”

• Expresses a personal response to print media images such as newspaper and magazine pictures, posters, advertisements,
 e.g., “I preferred that magazine picture because this advert made me…”

Group Guided Reading

• Reads silently and aloud from fiction and non-fiction books at own level in a guided reading group with teacher, that is,
 whole group reads same text

• Uses sight words, phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills and comprehension skills to make meaning

• Reads with increasing fluency and speed using correct pronunciation

Paired/Independent reading

• Reads independently at a more complex level for enjoyment or information from a variety of available texts: comics, simple
 fiction and non-fiction books

CAPS 101
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 2 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal Lessons three times a week of 15 minutes

Children continue to use print script in written recording but begin to learn a type of joined print script. The type of
joined script or cursive writing will be informed by the school’s handwriting policy/Provincial Policy

Maintenance of the print script

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

• Maintains the use of print script for written recording

Transition to a joined script or cursive writing

• Copies and writes at least two letters of joined script or cursive writing per week, completing all letters by the end of the term

• Copies and writes short words in joined script or cursive writing

• Copies and writes commonly used capital letters in joined script or cursive writing (e.g. A, E, H, I, M, O, S, T, W, Y.)

• Copies and writes short sentences in joined script or cursive writing

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group lessons two to three times a week for 20 minutes building on and linking to the Shared
Reading. Use the Shared Writing activities to also model the use of correct punctuation, spelling and grammar (tenses,
plurals, prepositions). Provide a frame to assist children to write a recipe and a framework to organise information
into a chart or table. Model how to use a simple dictionary, explaining alphabetical order.

• Participates in a discussion and contributes ideas

• Experiments with words: writes a simple poem or song

• Writes at least two paragraphs (ten sentences) on personal experiences or events such as a family celebration

• Drafts, writes and publishes own story of at least two paragraphs, using language such as ‘once upon a time’ and ‘in the
 end’

• Organizes information in a chart or table

• Uses informational structures when writing such as writes recipes

• Sequences text by using words like ‘first’, ‘next’ and ‘finally’

• Uses correct punctuation (full stops, commas, question marks and exclamation marks) so that others can read what has
 been written

• Spells common words correctly and attempts to spell unfamiliar words using phonic knowledge

• Uses present, past and future tenses correctly

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary

• Uses a dictionary to check on meanings and spellings of words

 102 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

Maintenance of the print script

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

• Maintains the use of print script for written recording

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

Transition to a joined script or cursive writing

• Copies and writes at least two letters of joined script or cursive writing per week, completing all letters by the end of the term

• Copies and writes short words in joined script or cursive writing

• Copies and writes commonly used capital letters in joined script or cursive writing . A, E, H, I, M, O, S, T, W, Y

• Copies and writes short sentences in joined script or cursive writing

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing:

• Experiments with words: writes a simple poem or song

• Drafts, writes and publishes own story of at least two paragraphs, using language such as ‘once upon a time’ and ‘in the
 end’

• Uses correct punctuation (full stops, commas, question marks and exclamation marks) so that others can read what has
 been written

• Spells common words correctly and attempts to spell unfamiliar words using phonic knowledge

• Uses present, past and future tenses correctly

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Writes at least two paragraphs (ten sentences) on personal experiences or events such as a family celebration

• Organizes information in a chart or table

• Uses informational structures when writing such as writes recipes

• Sequences text by using words like ‘first’, ‘next’ and ‘finally’

• Uses correct punctuation (full stops, commas, question marks and exclamation marks) so that others can read what has
 been written

• Spells common words correctly and attempts to spell unfamiliar words using phonic knowledge

• Uses present, past and future tenses correctly

CAPS 103
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
RECOMMENDED TEXTS/RESOURCES FOR THE YEAR

LISTENING AND SPEAKING

• Pictures and posters

• Objects related to the themes and topics, puppets, masks etc

• Story board pieces and jig-saw puzzles

• Pictures to sequence

• Improvised costumes for role-play and other oral activities

• Musical instruments (tambourine; percussion sets etc)

• CDs or tapes with stories, poems, rhymes and songs, CD player or tape recorder, television and video tapes/DVDs

• Storybooks and oral stories
READING AND PHONICS

• Pictures and posters

• Phonic wall charts

• Graded reading scheme/s

• Big books - some produced in Shared writing sessions

• Other enlarged texts such as poems, songs, rhymes etc.

• Story books, non-fiction books and picture books for the classroom reading corner

• Stories developed during shared writing sessions

• Nursery rhymes, poems and songs

• Short ‘fun’ books with 1-2 sentences on a page for the classroom reading corner

• Flash card labels for classroom items, displays and for sight words

• Name cards for children

• Pointers to use when reading enlarged texts, wall stories, displays

• Picture and word puzzles and games

• Newspapers and magazines
WRITING AND HANDWRITING

• Writing materials such as pencils, coloured pencils, wax crayons, blank paper in various sizes (A3, A4, A5), ruler, eraser,
 17mm / 8.5mm lined jotters, blank jotters

• Writing and sentence strips or desk sized charts for print script, joined script and/or cursive writing

• Flipchart paper and thick Koki pens

• Personal dictionaries

• Simple children’s dictionaries

 104 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
3.4 GRADE 3

 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM

 TERM 1
 LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
 CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

 Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

 • Talks about personal experiences. For example, tells news expressing feelings and opinions

 • Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker and taking turns to speak

 • Uses appropriate language when speaking to friends and adults, recognising the way the class uses slang. For example,
 telling parents how the ball came to break the window and then telling friends about the same incident

 Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities

 Weeks 1 - 5

 • Listens to a complex sequence of instructions (at least 4) and responds appropriately

 • Listens for the main idea and for detail in stories and answers higher-order questions, e.g., “Do you think the title is the best
 one for this story? Why?”

 • Asks questions for clarification and comments on what was heard, e.g., “Did that really happen? Then what did you do?”

 • Expresses feelings about a text and gives reasons, e.g., “I really feel that the author could have given a happier ending to
 the story. The dolphin tried so hard to escape.”

 Weeks 6 - 10

 • Participates in discussions, asking questions and showing sensitivity to the feelings of others

 • Answers questions and gives reasons for the answers, e.g., “Yes. I think the title tells the reader what the story is about.”
 ASSESSMENT

 Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

 Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)

 • Listens without interrupting, showing respect for the speaker and taking turns to speak

 • Expresses feelings about a text and gives reasons, e.g., “I really feel that the author could have given a happier ending to
 the story. The dolphin tried so hard to escape.”

 • Participates in discussions, asking questions and showing sensitivity to the feelings of others

 Formal Assessment Activity 1:

 Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

 • Talks about personal experiences. For example, tells news expressing feelings and opinions

 • Listens to a complex sequence of instructions (at least 4) and responds appropriately

 • Listens for the main idea and for detail in stories and answers higher-order questions, e.g., “Do you think the title is the best
 one for this story? Why?”

CAPS 105
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 1
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Phonic Activities three times a week for 15 minutes

Revise the single sounds and the consonant and vowel digraphs taught in Grade 2. Discuss the role of letters of the
alphabet in different words drawing attention to the different sounds the same letter or letters represent. For example
‘a’ as in ‘apple’ and ‘a’ as in ‘zebra’; ‘g’ as in ‘gate’ and ‘g’ as in ‘giant’.

Simultaneously work on word building and aural recognition activities. Use opportunities to revise the phonics being
used in other language activities. For example, in Shared Reading and Shared Writing. Use the Phonics to inform the
spelling programme for the year.

• Identifies letter-sound and letter-name relationships of all single letters

• Recognises consonant digraphs (sh-, -sh, ch-, -ch, th-, -th and wh-) at the beginning and end of words ( sh-irt, ch-irp, th-ink,
 wh-en, wi-sh, ri-ch, bo-th)

• Recognises vowel digraphs taught in Grade 2 such as ‘oo’, ‘ee’, ‘ea’, ‘ai’, ‘oa’, ‘ay’

• Recognises that some sounds are represented by a number of different spelling choices (play, pain, plate; feet, read, key;
 boat, blow, note; tiger, like, sigh, fly)

• Recognises ‘silent e’ or split digraphs in words such as same, bite, note

• Recognises and uses rhyming words such as blow, flow, and glow

• Builds 3, 4 and 5-letter words using the consonant and vowel digraphs taught this term

• Sorts letters and words into alphabetical order

• Spells words correctly using phonic knowledge

• Learns to spell ten words a week taken from phonics lessons and sight words

• Writes three short sentences dictated by teacher

Daily Reading Activities

Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week; a teacher-modelled process
with the whole class.

Each session will have a learning focus from the following: concepts of print, text features, phonics, language
patterns, word identification strategies and comprehension at a range of levels - literal, reorganisation, inferential,
evaluation and appreciation questions.

Model the five finger strategy where each finger represents a strategy the reader can use to systematically figure out
how to read an unknown word and its meaning: children check by asking whether the word they ‘solve’ sounds right,
looks right and makes sense. Start teaching children this process when they meet unknown words.

• Uses visual cues to talk about a graphical text, e.g., looks at a photograph, and discusses what it is about, where it was
 taken, etc.

• Reads enlarged texts such as poems, big books, posters and electronic texts as a whole class with the teacher (shared
 reading)

• Reads book as a whole class with the teacher (shared reading) and describes the main idea and the main characters

 106 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

• Reads instructions in the classroom

• Reads different poems around a topic and discusses these (both form and meanings)

• Answers higher order questions before, during and after reading a shared text, e.g., “What do you think will happen next?
 Why do you say this?”

• Recognises inverted commas to show direct speech in written stories

• Recognises apostrophes in contractions showing both possession and contractions such as Sipho’s book, can’t

Group Guided Reading:

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the teacher
twice a week. Teacher works with same-ability groups of children, matching children to texts at the instructional level
(word recognition between 90 - 95% accuracy). Graded reading schemes will mostly be used.

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with the teacher, that is, whole group reads the
 same story on the instructional reading level of the group

• Uses phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading both silently and aloud

• Uses self-correcting strategies when reading: re-reading, pausing, practising a word before saying it aloud

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

• Shows an understanding of punctuation (full stops, question marks, exclamation marks, inverted commas) when reading
 aloud

Paired/Independent reading (three times a week)

Introduce Paired/Independent reading. Select texts that are known or are at the independent reading level of the child
 (simpler than those used in shared reading with more than 95% word recognition accuracy when reading the text)

• Reads independently: picture books and simple story books

• Plays reading games and completes crosswords to reinforce reading and vocabulary skills such as Snap, Memory
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics: (oral and/or practical)

• Recognises that some sounds are represented by a number of different spelling choices (play, pain, plate; feet, read, key;
 boat, blow, note; tiger, like, sigh, fly)

• Recognises and uses rhyming words such as blow, flow, and glow

• Builds 3, 4 and 5-letter words using the consonant and vowel digraphs taught this term

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Identifies letter-sound and letter-name relationships of all single letters

• Recognises consonant digraphs (sh-, -sh, ch-, -ch, th-, -th and wh-) at the beginning and end of words (sh-irt, ch-irp, th-ink,
 wh-en, wi-sh, ri-ch, bo-th)

• Recognises vowel digraphs taught in Grade 2 such as ‘oo’, ‘ee’, ‘ea’, ‘ai’, ‘oa’, ‘ay’

• Recognises ‘silent e’ or split digraphs in words such as same, bite, note

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading: (oral and/or practical and/or written)

Shared Reading

• Reads enlarged texts such as poems, big books, posters and electronic texts as a whole class with the teacher (shared
 reading)

• Reads instructions in the classroom

CAPS 107
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Group Guided Reading:

• Reads both silently and aloud at own level in a Guided Reading group with the teacher, that is, the whole group reads same
 story based on the instructional reading level of the group

• Uses phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

• Shows an understanding of punctuation (full stops, question marks, exclamation marks, inverted commas) when reading
 aloud

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

Shared Reading

• Uses visual cues to talk about a graphical text such as a photograph and discusses what it is about, where it was taken, etc.

• Reads book as a whole class with the teacher (shared reading) and describes the main idea and the main characters

• Answers higher order questions before, during and after reading a shared text, e.g., “What do you think will happen next?
 Why do you say this?”

Group Guided Reading:

• Reads aloud at own level in a Guided Reading group with the teacher, that is, the whole group reads same story based on
 the instructional reading level of the group

• Uses phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills when reading

 108 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 1
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting:

Formal Lessons three times a week of 15 minutes

Children may still be using print script in written recording until the end of the second term although handwriting
lessons will focus on practising the individual letters and joins needed for the joined script or cursive writing. The
type of joined script or cursive writing will be informed by the school’s handwriting policy/Provincial Policy

• Forms all lower and upper-case letters in joined script or cursive writing and begins to join various letters and to form words
 in the selected joined script or cursive writing

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

• Writes short words in the joined script or cursive writing

• Spaces words correctly in lines

• Writes a sentence legibly and correctly in both the print script and the joined script or cursive writing

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group lessons two to three times a week for 20 minutes. Use the Shared Writing activities to model
the use of correct punctuation, spelling and grammar (tenses, plurals). Provide a writing frame to assist children to
write a story or a description and guide them through the steps of the writing process. Children start their personal
dictionaries.

• Draws pictures and writes sentences to show understanding of a story

• Writes instructions, e.g., to a friend

• Contributes ideas, words and sentences for a class story (shared writing)

• Uses a picture to choose a topic to write about

• Talks to a partner to begin planning writing

• Asks questions to help define the writing task

• Writes at least one paragraph of eight sentences such as own news, creative story, description of an incident/experiment

• Writes and illustrates sentences (six to eight sentences) on a topic to contribute to a book for the class library

• Writes words to form a sentence using capital letters, full stops, question marks, commas, exclamation marks and inverted
 commas

• Uses phonic knowledge and spelling rules to write unfamiliar words

• Uses present, past and future tense correctly

• Uses subject-verb agreement correctly, e.g., I want / She wants …

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of words such as apple, book, cat, etc.

CAPS 109
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

• Spaces words correctly in lines

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Forms all lower and upper-case letters in joined script or cursive writing and begins to join various letters and to form words
 in the selected joined script or cursive writing

• Writes short words in the joined script or cursive writing

• Writes a sentence legibly and correctly in both the print script and the joined script or cursive writing

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing

• Draws pictures and writes sentences to show understanding of a story

• Writes instructions, e.g., to a friend

• Contributes ideas, words and sentences for a class story (shared writing)

• Uses subject-verb agreement correctly, e.g., I want / She wants

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial sound of words such as apple, book, cat, etc.

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Writes at least one paragraph of eight sentences on own news, creative story, description of an incident/experiment etc.

• Writes words to form a sentence using capital letters, full stops, question marks, commas, exclamation marks and inverted
 commas

• Uses phonic knowledge and spelling rules to write unfamiliar words

• Uses present, past and future tense correctly

 110 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

• Listens and responds to radio or intercom announcements and instructions

• Talks about personal experiences such as tells news expressing feelings and opinions

• Listens to stories, poems and songs and expresses feelings about the story, poem or song, giving reasons

• With support, predicts what will happen in a story, e.g., “Look at the title and the cover of the book. What do you think is
 going to happen?”

• Works out cause and effect in a story using connecting words such as ‘because’, e.g., ‘“The children fell off the bridge
 because…”

• Uses language to investigate and explore such as suggesting alternatives, e.g., ‘I think it could…’, ‘If…then…’

• Asks questions to clarify, plan and get information on an activity

• Analyses, compares and contrasts information such as the eating habits of a child and a monkey

• Understands and uses appropriate language of different subjects such as Life Skills

• Suggests solutions to a problem, specifically word problems in Mathematics

Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities

Weeks 1-3

• Listens to more complex instructions (at least 5) and responds appropriately

• Makes an oral presentation. For example, ‘Show and Tell’ - describes and compares an object

Weeks 4 - 6

• Listens to stories, read by the teacher or over the radio, for a longer period with interest

• Tells a short story with a simple plot and different characters

Weeks 7 - 10

• Participates in group and class discussions, suggests topics and contributes ideas

• Talks about a general news event, expressing feelings and opinions

• Listens to, and composes, riddles and jokes
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)

• Listens and responds to radio or intercom announcements and instructions

• Talks about a general news event, expressing feelings and opinions

• Listens to, and composes, riddles and jokes

• Uses language to investigate and explore. Suggests alternatives such as ‘I think it could…’, ‘If…then…’

• Asks questions to clarify, plan and get information on an activity

CAPS 111
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
• Analyses, compares and contrasts information such as the eating habits of a child and a monkey

• Understands and uses appropriate language of different subjects such as Life Skills

• Suggests solutions to a problem, specifically word problems in Mathematics

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Listens to more complex instructions (at least 5) and responds appropriately

• Makes an oral presentation. For example, ‘Show and Tell’ - describes and compares an object

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Listens to stories, read by the teacher or over the radio, for a longer period with interest

• Tells a short story with a simple plot and different characters

Formal Assessment Activity 3 :

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Participates in group and class discussions, suggests topics and contributes ideas

• Listens to stories, poems and songs and expresses feelings about the story, poem or song, giving reasons

• With support, predicts what will happen in a story, e.g., “Look at the title and the cover of the book. What do you think is
 going to happen?”

• Works out cause and effect in a story using connecting words such as ‘because’, e.g., “The children fell off the bridge
 because…”

 112 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Phonic Activities three times a week for 15 minutes:

Introduce new vowel blends and guide children to recognise that a particular sound can be represented by different
combinations of letters. This has important implications for spelling. Ensure that children understand the words they
are sounding and can use them to form meaningful sentences. Use the Phonics to inform the spelling programme.

• Recognises that some sounds can be represented by a number of different spelling choices such as

• ow (cow) ou (found)

• aw (draw), au (autumn)

• tie, high, sky

• few, blue)

• Recognises digraphs making /f/ (e.g. ‘ph’ as in elephant, ‘gh’ as in laugh)

• Recognises that the same spelling can represent different sounds, e.g. ‘bread’, ‘read’

• Uses words in written sentences that are pronounced the same way, but have different meanings. For example ‘read’ and
 ‘reed’ - I like to read books. I saw a bird on a reed.

• Builds words using the phonic skills taught this year

• Spells words correctly using phonic knowledge in informal tests, in dictation and in all written work

Daily Reading Activities

Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week; a teacher-modelled process
with the whole class. Include graphical and non-fiction texts during this term.

• Reads enlarged texts such as poems, big books, posters and electronic texts as a whole class with the teacher (shared
 reading)

• Uses visual cues to identify the purpose of advertisements and the intended audience

• Reads book as a whole class with the teacher (shared reading) and discusses the sequence of events, setting and cause-
 effect relations

• Uses the information from a graphical text, e.g., takes part in a walk around the school by following the directions on a map

• Finds and uses sources of information such as community members, library books

• Uses table of contents, index and page numbers to find information

• Uses key words and headings to find information in non-fiction texts

• Answers a range of higher order questions based on the passage read, e.g., “How would you describe the behaviour of
 the troll?”

CAPS 113
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Group Guided Reading

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

Teach children to monitor self when reading, both in the area of word recognition and comprehension. (Children are
taught to ask: ‘Does it sound right?’, ‘Does it look right?’ and ‘Does it make sense?’) Model the process in Shared
Reading and apply it in Guided Reading with support.

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with the teacher, that is, the whole group reads
 the same story at the instructional level of the group

• Uses phonics, context clues and structural analysis decoding skills when reading unfamiliar words

• Uses self-correcting strategies when reading: re-reading, pausing, practising a word before saying it aloud

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

• Uses diagrams and illustrations in text to increase understanding

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression

Paired/Independent Reading

Daily reading related activities for 20 minutes while some groups are doing guided reading with the teacher.

• Reads aloud to a partner

• Reads own and others’ writing

• Reads independently books read in Shared Reading sessions, simple story books and books from the reading corner
 as well as any other texts, such as readers read in the previous year or at the beginning of this year, at the independent
 reading level of the children
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics (oral and/or practical)

• Builds words using the phonic skills taught this year

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises that some sounds can be represented by a number of different spelling choices

• ow (cow) ou (found)

• aw (draw), au (autumn)

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises that some sounds can be represented by a number of different spelling choices

• tie, high, sky

• few, blue

Formal Assessment Activity 3:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises digraphs making /f/ such as ‘ph’ as in elephant, ‘gh’ as in laugh

• Recognises that the same spelling can represent different sounds such as ‘bread’, ‘read’

• Uses words in written sentences that are pronounced the same way, but have different meanings (‘read’ and ‘reed’ - I like
 to read books. I saw a bird on a reed.)

 114 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :
Reading: (oral and/or practical and/or written)
Shared Reading
• Answers a range of higher order questions based on the passage read, e.g., “How would you describe the behaviour of
 the troll?”
Group Guided Reading:
• Uses self-correcting strategies when reading: re-reading, pausing, practising a word before saying it aloud
• Monitors self when reading, both in the area of word recognition and comprehension
Paired/Independent Reading
• Reads aloud to a partner
• Reads own and others’ writing
• Reads independently books read in Shared Reading sessions, picture story books and books from the reading corner
 as well as any other texts, such as readers read in the previous year or at the beginning of this year, at the independent
 reading level of the children
Formal Assessment Activity 1:
Reading (oral and/ or practical and/or written)
Shared Reading
• Reads enlarged texts such as poems, big books, posters and electronic texts as a whole class with teacher (shared reading)
• Uses visual cues to identify the purpose of advertisements and the intended audience
Group Guided Reading:
• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads the same
 story at the instructional level of the group
• Uses phonics, context clues and structural analysis decoding skills when reading unfamiliar words
• Reads with increasing fluency and expression
Formal Assessment Activity 2:
Reading (oral and/ or practical and/or written)
Shared Reading
• Reads book as a whole class with teacher (shared reading) and discusses sequence of events, setting and cause effect
 relations
• Answers a range of higher order questions based on the passage read, e.g., “How would you describe the behaviour of
 the troll?”
Paired/Independent Reading
• Reads independently books read in Shared Reading sessions, simple story books and books from the reading corner
 as well as any other texts, such as readers read in the previous year or at the beginning of this year, at the independent
 reading level of the children
Formal Assessment Activity 3:
Reading (oral and/ or practical and/or written)
Shared Reading
• Uses the information from a graphical text, e.g., takes part in a walk around the school by following the directions on a map
• Finds and uses sources of information such as community members, library books
• Uses table of contents, index and page numbers to find information
• Uses key words and headings to find information in non-fiction texts
Group Guided Reading:
• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, whole group reads the same
 story at the instructional level of the group
• Uses phonics, context clues and structural analysis decoding skills when reading unfamiliar words
• Uses diagrams and illustrations in text to increase understanding

CAPS 115
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 2
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal Lessons three times a week of 15 minutes

Children make the transition from using print script in written recording to a joined script or cursive writing by the end
of this term. Handwriting lessons will focus on practising the individual lower case and capital letters and the joins
needed for the new script. Children must be able to transcribe from print script (e.g. in a book) into the joined script
or cursive writing.

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

• Transcribes words and sentences correctly in the joined script or cursive writing

• Forms all upper and lower case letters correctly and automatically in the joined script or cursive writing

• Uses correct letter formation in all written work

• Copies words correctly from a variety of sources, that is, board, strips, work cards etc. and writes with increased speed in
 the joined script or cursive writing

• Makes transition to the joined script or cursive writing in all written recording, that is, the date, own name, and own written
 texts

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group lessons two to three times a week for 20 minutes. Use the Shared Writing activities to model
the use of correct punctuation, grammar and spelling. Provide a writing frame to assist children to write their own
stories.

• Participates in a discussion to choose a topic to write about

• Writes at least two paragraphs (ten or more sentences) on personal experiences such as daily news or a school event

• Writes own story or a familiar story or another creative text of at least ten sentences

• Keeps a diary for one week, noting the weather and one other piece of information

• Writes a simple book review

• Writes and illustrates a story to contribute to a book for the class library

• Uses correct grammar so that others can read and understand what has been written

• Uses punctuation correctly: capital letters, full stops, commas, question marks, exclamation marks and inverted commas

• Identifies and uses nouns, adjectives, verbs and adverbs correctly

• Uses phonics knowledge and spelling rules to write unfamiliar words

• Uses more complex tenses such as present and past progressive. For example, He is reading a book. They were watching
 TV last night.

• Reads and edits own writing by correcting spelling, punctuation, etc.

• Reads own writing to a friend or a group

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of words such as gate, happy, ink

 116 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Uses handwriting tools effectively: pencil, eraser, ruler

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Forms all upper and lower case letters correctly and automatically in the joined script or cursive writing

• Transcribes words and sentences correctly in the joined script or cursive writing

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Handwriting

• Forms all upper and lower case letters correctly and automatically in the joined script or cursive writing

• Makes transition to the joined script or cursive writing in all written recording, that is, the date, own name and own written
 texts

Formal Assessment Activity 3:

Handwriting

• Copies words correctly from a variety of sources, that is, board, strips, work cards etc. and writes with increased speed in
 the joined script or cursive writing

• Uses correct letter formation in all written work

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing:

• Uses more complex tenses such as present and past progressive. For example, He is reading a book. They were watching
 TV last night.

• Reads own writing to a friend or a group

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary using initial letter of words such as gate, happy, ink

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Writes a simple book review

• Writes at least two paragraphs (ten or more sentences) on personal experiences such as daily news or a school event

• Uses correct grammar so that others can read and understand what has been written

• Uses phonics knowledge and spelling rules to write unfamiliar words

• Uses punctuation correctly; capital letters, full stops, commas, question marks, exclamation marks and inverted commas

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Writing

• Keeps a diary for one week, noting the weather and one other piece of information

• Identifies and uses nouns, adjectives, verbs and adverbs correctly

Formal Assessment Activity 3:

Writing

• Participates in a discussion to choose a topic to write about

• Writes own story or a familiar story or another creative text of at least ten sentences

• Reads and edits own writing by correcting spelling, punctuation, etc.

CAPS 117
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

• Makes an oral presentation: tells news or talks about an experience logically and in sequence

• Uses an ever-increasing vocabulary when speaking

• Suggests solutions to a problem, specifically word problems in Mathematics

Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities

Weeks 1-3

• Interviews people for a particular purpose such as to find out about a person’s work

• Listens to a story and works out cause and effect in the story

Weeks 4 - 6

• Participates in discussions, giving useful feedback to others

• Puts events in order of logical sequence

Weeks 7 - 10

• Listens for the detail in stories and other oral texts and answers open-ended questions, e.g., “What will you do when you
 grow up?”

• Tells a story with a beginning, middle and end
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)

• Uses an ever-increasing vocabulary when speaking

• Suggests solutions to a problem, specifically word problems in Mathematics

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Interviews people for a particular purpose such as to find out about a person’s work

• Listens to a story and works out cause and effect in the story

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Participates in discussions, giving useful feedback to others

• Puts events in order of logical sequence

Formal Assessment Activity 3:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Listens for the detail in stories and other oral texts and answers open-ended questions, e.g., “What will you do when you
 grow up?”

• Tells a story with a beginning, middle and end

• Makes an oral presentation such as tells news or talks about an experience logically and in sequence

 118 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Phonic Activities three times a week for 15 minutes:

Continue to use the phonics to inform the spelling programme for the term.

• Recognises all vowel and consonant blends learnt so far

• Recognises silent letters in words, that is, ‘k’ as in know, ‘l’ as in half, ‘b’ as in comb, ‘w’ as in write, ‘h’ as in hour

• Uses words that are pronounced and spelt the same but have different meanings such as fly : to fly in an aeroplane or a
 fly that is an insect

• Uses words that sound the same but are spelt differently such as ‘pair’ and ‘pear’, ‘hair’ and ‘hare’

• Uses both the letter sound as well as the letter name to spell words

• Builds words using the phonic skills taught this year

• Spells words correctly using phonic knowledge in informal tests, in dictation and in all written work

Daily Reading Activities

Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week.

Introduce different genre such as plays and different types of poems.

• Reads enlarged texts such as poems, big books of stories, plays, posters and electronic texts as a whole class with teacher
 (shared reading)

• Reads a range of different types of poems around a topic and discusses these (both form and meanings, word selection)

• Interprets information from graphical texts such as advertisements, pictures, graphs, charts

• Reads book as a whole class with teacher (shared reading) and discusses main idea, characters and plot

• Expresses whether a story was liked and is able to justify answer, e.g., “I loved this story because it reminded me of…”

• Answers a range of higher order questions based on the text read, e.g., “Should her grandmother have told her that…?”

• Uses a dictionary to find new vocabulary and their meanings

Group Guided Reading:

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with the teacher, that is, the whole group reads
 the same story at the instructional level of the group

• Reads different genres such as play scripts

• Uses a range of self-correcting methods when reading: re-reading, reading on, pausing

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression, pronouncing words correctly and accurately

• Uses phonics, contextual or structural analysis decoding skills when reading unfamiliar words

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

CAPS 119
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Paired/Independent Reading:

Daily reading related activities for 20 minutes while some groups are doing guided reading with the teacher.

• Reads aloud to a partner

• Reads own and others’ writing

• Reads independently books read in Shared Reading sessions, story books and books from the reading corner and any
 other texts, such as readers read earlier in the year, at the independent reading level of the children

• Finds information independently or in pairs from level-appropriate non-fiction texts
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics (oral and/or practical)

• Uses both the letter sound as well as the letter name to spell words

• Builds words using the phonic skills taught this year

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises all vowel and consonant blends learnt so far

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises silent letters in words, that is, ‘k’ as in know, ‘l’ as in half, ‘b’ as in comb, ‘w’ as in write, ‘h’ as in hour

Formal Assessment Activity 3:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Uses words that are pronounced and spelt the same but have different meanings such as fly : to fly in an aeroplane or a
 fly that is an insect

• Uses words that sound the same but are spelt differently such as ‘pair’ and ‘pear’, ‘hair’ and ‘hare’

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading: (oral and/or practical and/or written)

Shared Reading

• Answers a range of higher order questions based on the text read, e.g., “Should her grandmother have told her that…?”

Group Guided Reading:

• Reads different genres such as play scripts

• Monitors self when reading, both in the area of word recognition and comprehension

Paired/Independent Reading

• Reads aloud to a partner

• Reads own and others’ writing

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

Shared Reading

• Reads book as a whole class with the teacher (shared reading) and discusses main idea, characters and plot

• Expresses whether a story was liked and is able to justify answer, e.g., “I loved this story because it reminded me of…”

 120 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Group Guided Reading

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with the teacher, that is, the whole group reads
 the same story at the instructional level of the group

• Uses phonics, contextual or structural analysis decoding skills when reading unfamiliar words

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Reading (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

Shared Reading

• Interprets information from graphical texts: advertisements, pictures, graphs, charts

Paired/Independent Reading

• Reads independently books read in Shared Reading sessions, story books and books from the reading corner and any
 other texts, such as readers read earlier in the year, at the independent reading level of the children

Formal Assessment Activity 3:

Reading (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

Shared Reading

• Reads enlarged texts such as poems, big books of stories, plays, posters and electronic texts as a whole class with teacher
 (shared reading)

• Reads a range of different types of poems around a topic and discusses these (both form and meanings, word selection)

Group Guided Reading

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with teacher, that is, the whole group reads the
 same story at the instructional level of the group

• Uses a range of self-correcting methods when reading: re-reading, reading on, pausing

• Reads with increasing fluency and expression, pronouncing words correctly and accurately

CAPS 121
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 3
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal Lessons three times a week of 15 minutes

Children made the transition from using print script in written recording to a joined script or cursive writing by the end
of the second term. Handwriting lessons will focus on practising the individual lower case and capital letters and the
joins needed for the new script. Children must be able to transcribe from print script, e.g., in a book, into the joined
script or cursive writing.

• Copies written text from the board, textbooks, work cards, correctly, paying attention to correct letter formation and spacing
 in the joined script or cursive writing

• Writes with increasing speed

Shared, Group and Independent Writing

Whole class / small group lessons two to three times a week for 20 minutes. Provide a writing frame to assist children
to write personal texts such as a letter. Use Shared Writing activities to model the correct use of punctuation, grammar
and parts of speech. Use Shared Reading activities to teach grammar, different sentence types and punctuation.

• Writes personal texts in different forms: a diary entry, a letter to a relative, description

• Drafts, writes, edits and publishes own story of at least two paragraphs (ten or more sentences), with a title

• Writes and illustrates sentences on a topic to contribute to a book for the class library

• Summarises and records information using mind maps, tables, notices, diagrams or charts

• Uses different sentence types when writing such as statements, questions, commands

• Uses punctuation correctly: capital letters, full stops, commas, question marks, exclamation marks and inverted commas

• Identifies and uses nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs, adverbs and prepositions correctly

• Joins sentences using conjunctions such as ‘and’, ‘but’

• Uses a variety of vocabulary to make the writing more interesting

• Uses phonics knowledge and spelling rules to write unfamiliar words

• Reads own writing to the class

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Copies written text from the board, textbooks, work cards correctly, paying attention to correct letter formation and spacing
 in the joined script or cursive writing

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Copies written text from the board, textbooks, work cards correctly, paying attention to correct letter formation and spacing
 in the joined script or cursive writing

 122 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Handwriting

• Copies written text from the board, textbooks, work cards correctly, paying attention to correct letter formation and spacing
 in the joined script or cursive writing

Formal Assessment Activity 3:

Handwriting

• Writes with increasing speed

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing

• Reads own writing to the class

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Writes personal texts in different forms: a diary entry, a letter to a relative, description

• Uses a variety of vocabulary to make the writing more interesting

• Uses different sentence types when writing such as statements, questions, commands, etc.

Formal Assessment Activity 2:

Writing

• Drafts, writes, edits and presents own story of at least two paragraphs of ten or more sentences, with a title

• Uses punctuation correctly: capital letters, full stops, commas, question marks, exclamation marks and inverted commas

• Uses phonics knowledge and spelling rules to write unfamiliar words

Formal Assessment Activity 3:

Writing

• Summarises and records information using mind maps, tables, notices, diagrams or charts

• Identifies and uses nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs, adverbs and prepositions correctly

• Joins sentences using conjunctions such as ‘and’, ‘but’

CAPS 123
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
LISTENING AND SPEAKING (ORAL) SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 1 hour per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Daily / Weekly activities in all areas of Language and other subjects

• Uses terms such as subject, verb, object, question, statement, command, synonym, antonym, exclamation mark when
 discussing texts

• Understands and uses appropriate language of different subjects

Twice weekly focussed listening and speaking activities

Weeks 1 - 5

• Engages in conversation as a social skill, accepting and respecting the way others speak

• Uses language imaginatively: tells jokes and riddles using appropriate volume and intonation

• Listens for the detail in stories and answers open-ended questions, e.g., “Do you think it is right that you have to wear
 school uniform?”

• Tells a story using descriptive language, different gestures and facial expressions

Weeks 6 - 10

• Listens to a story and works out cause and effect in response to questions such as “What would have happened if the dog
 had not been found?”

• Plans and makes an oral presentation: tells personal news, describes something experienced, recounts an event etc. using
 a visual aid

• Expresses feelings and opinions about a text and gives reasons, e.g., “This book is boring because it has no pictures and
 many long words!”

• Discusses solutions to a problem using higher order thinking skills, e.g., “If your father can’t collect you this afternoon you
 could…”
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Listening and Speaking: (oral and/or practical)

• Uses terms such as subject, verb, object, question, statement, command, synonym, antonym, exclamation mark when
 discussing texts

• Expresses feelings and opinions about a text and gives reasons, e.g., “This book is boring because it has no pictures and
 many long words!”

• Discusses solutions to a problem using higher order thinking skills, e.g., “If your father can’t collect you this afternoon you
 could…”

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Listening and Speaking (oral and/ or practical)

• Tells a story using descriptive language, different gestures and facial expressions

• Listens for the detail in stories and answers open-ended questions, e.g., “Do you think it is right that you have to wear
 school uniform?”

• Uses language imaginatively: tells jokes and riddles using appropriate volume and intonation

• Plans and makes an oral presentation: tells personal news, describes something experienced, recounts an event etc. using
 a visual aid

 124 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
READING AND PHONICS SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 4 hours 30 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 5 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Phonic Activities three times a week for 15 minutes

Revise the phonics taught so far and introduce more complex combinations. Link to the spelling programme for each
week.

• Recognises and uses all phonics learnt so far

• Recognises hard and soft sounds of ‘c’ and ‘g’ such as ‘c’ as in city; ‘g’ as in giant

• Recognises vowels such as -ere in ‘here’, -air as in ‘hair’, -are as in ‘square’

• Recognises and uses spelling patterns such as -igh [high], -ough [tough], -eigh [neigh], -augh [caught]

• Recognises and uses synonyms: happy is the same as glad and antonyms: good is the opposite of bad

• Recognises and uses prefixes such as un-, re- and suffixes such as -ful, -ness

• Breaks down multi-syllabic words into separate syllables: re-mem-ber

• Builds words using the phonic skills taught this year

• Spells words correctly using their phonic knowledge in informal tests, in dictation and in all written work

Daily Reading Activities

Group Guided Reading (two groups per day) and 2 - 3 Shared Reading sessions per week.

Shared Reading

Whole class lessons 2 - 3 times weekly for 15 minutes using at least one text per week.

Include fiction, non-fiction, newspaper articles, dialogues and graphical texts.

• Reads enlarged texts such as fiction and non-fiction big books, newspaper articles, dialogues and electronic texts as a
 whole class with the teacher (shared reading)

• Reads written texts as a whole class with the teacher (shared reading) and discusses characters, the ‘problem’ in the story,
 the plot and the values in the text

• Uses visual cues to read graphical texts and starts to analyse text for attitudes and assumptions, e.g., “Who is this
 advertisement meant to appeal to? Why do you think this?”

• Answers a range of higher order questions based on the passage read, e.g., “Suppose the shop owner left the door open
 when he went home that night. What might have happened?”

• Uses a dictionary to find new vocabulary and their meanings

Group Guided Reading:

The teacher works with two groups each day, spending 15 minutes with each group. Each group works with the
teacher twice a week.

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with the teacher; whole group reads the same
 story at the instructional level of the group

• Reads with increasing fluency, speed and expression

• Uses phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills and comprehension skills to make meaning

CAPS 125
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
• Monitors self when reading, both in the area of word recognition and comprehension

• Uses self-correcting strategies when reading: reading, pausing, practising a word before saying it aloud

• Plays word games that draw on reading and vocabulary knowledge and skills

Paired/Independent Reading

Daily reading related activities for 20 minutes while some groups are doing guided reading with the teacher. Use texts
 that are known or are at the independent reading level of the child.

• Reads own and others’ writing

• Reads aloud to a partner

• Reads independently at a more complex level for enjoyment or information from a variety of available texts: magazines
 and comics, simple fiction and non-fiction books and books from different cultures, books read in Shared Reading sessions
ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Phonics: (oral and/or practical)

• Recognises and uses all phonics learnt so far

• Recognises hard and soft sounds of ‘c’ and ‘g’ such as ‘c’ as in city; ‘g’ as in giant

• Recognises vowels such - as ‘ere’ in ‘here’, -air as in ‘hair’, -are as in ‘square’

• Breaks down multi-syllabic words into separate syllables such as re-mem-ber

• Builds words using the phonic skills taught this year

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Phonics (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

• Recognises and uses all phonics learnt so far

• Recognises and uses spelling patterns such as -igh (high), -ough (tough), -eigh (neigh), -augh (caught)

• Recognises and uses synonyms such as happy is the same as glad and antonyms: good is the opposite of bad

• Recognises and uses prefixes such as un-, re- and suffixes such as -ful, -ness

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Reading (oral and/or practical and/or written)

Shared Reading

• Reads enlarged texts such as fiction and non-fiction big books, newspaper articles, dialogues and electronic texts (computer
 texts) as a whole class with the teacher (shared reading)

Group Guided Reading

• Plays word games that draw on reading and vocabulary knowledge and skills

Paired/Independent reading

• Reads own and others’ writing

• Reads aloud to a partner

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Reading (oral and/ or practical and/or written)

Shared Reading

• Reads written texts as a whole class with the teacher (shared reading) and discusses characters, the ‘problem’ in the story,
 the plot and the values in the text

 126 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

• Uses visual cues to read graphical texts and starts to analyse text for attitudes and assumptions, e.g., “Who is this
 advertisement meant to appeal to? Why do you think this?

• Answers a range of higher order questions based on the passage read, e.g., “Suppose the shop owner left the door open
 when he went home that night. What might have happened?”

Group Guided Reading

• Reads both silently and out loud from own book in a guided reading group with the teacher, that is, the whole group reads
 the same story at the instructional level of the group

• Reads with increasing fluency, speed and expression

• Uses phonics, contextual and structural analysis decoding skills and comprehension skills to make meaning

• Monitors self when reading, both word recognition and comprehension

• Uses self-correcting strategies when reading: re-reading, pausing, practising a word before saying it aloud

Paired/Independent reading

• Reads independently at a more complex level for enjoyment or information from a variety of available texts: magazines
 and comics, simple fiction and non-fiction books and books from different cultures, books read in Shared Reading sessions

CAPS 127
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
 GRADE 3 HOME LANGUAGE ENGLISH

 REQUIREMENTS PER TERM
 TERM 4
WRITING SUGGESTED CONTACT TIME

 Minimum Time: 1 hour 45 minutes per week

 Maximum Time: 2 hours per week
CONTENT/CONCEPTS/SKILLS

Handwriting

Formal Lessons three times a week of 15 minutes

Focus on activities that increase the writing speed whilst maintaining neatness and legibility. Include activities that
require children to transpose from print to the joined script or cursive writing.

• Copies written text from the board, textbooks, work cards correctly, paying attention to correct letter formation and spacing

• Uses the joined script or cursive writing for all written recording

• Experiments with using a pen for writing

• Writes neatly and legibly with confidence and speed in a joined script or cursive writing

Shared, Group and Independent Writing:

Whole class / small group lessons two to three times a week for 20 minutes. Use the Shared Writing activities to model
the use of correct punctuation, spelling and grammar (e.g. use of conjunctions, apostrophes). Provide writing frames
to assist children to write a dialogue and a newspaper article. Guide them through the steps of the writing process.

• Uses pre-writing strategies to gather information and plan writing: talks to a partner, creates a mind map, a planning frame

• Writes a selection of short texts for different purposes such as recounts, dialogues

• Writes about personal experiences in different forms such as a short newspaper article

• Drafts, writes, edits and publishes own story of at least two paragraphs (at least 12 sentences)

• Uses informational structures when writing such as experiments, recipes

• Sequences information and puts it under headings

• Uses apostrophes in contractions such as can’t, Mary’s

• Uses punctuation correctly: capital letters, full stops, commas, question marks, exclamation marks, inverted commas

• Uses conjunctions to form compound sentences

• Uses phonics knowledge and spelling rules to write more difficult words

• Builds own word bank and personal dictionary

• Uses a dictionary to find new vocabulary and check spelling

• Discusses own and others’ writing to get and give feedback

• Makes own books and contributes to class book collection

 128 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

ASSESSMENT

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Handwriting

• Copies written text from the board, textbooks, work cards correctly, paying attention to correct letter formation and spacing

• Experiments with using a pen for writing

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Handwriting

• Uses the joined script or cursive writing for all written recording

• Writes neatly and legibly with confidence and speed in a joined script or cursive writing

Suggestions for Informal Assessment Activities :

Writing

• Uses pre-writing strategies to gather information and plan writing: talks to a partner, creates a mind map, a planning frame

• Uses apostrophes in contractions such as can’t, Mary’s

• Uses conjunctions to form compound sentences

• Discusses own and others’ writing to get and give feedback

Formal Assessment Activity 1:

Writing

• Writes a selection of short texts for different purposes such as recounts, dialogues

• Writes about personal experiences in different forms such as a short newspaper article

• Drafts, writes, edits and presents own story of at least two paragraphs(at least 12 sentences)

• Uses informational structures when writing such as experiments, recipes

• Sequences information and puts it under headings

• Uses punctuation correctly: capital letters, full stops, commas, question marks, exclamation marks, inverted commas

• Uses phonics knowledge and spelling rules to write more difficult words

CAPS 129
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
RECOMMENDED TEXTS/RESOURCES FOR THE YEAR

LISTENING AND SPEAKING

• Pictures and posters

• Objects related to the themes and topics, puppets, masks etc

• Story board pieces

• Sequence pictures

• Improvised costumes for role-play and other oral activities

• CDs or tapes with stories, poems, rhymes and songs, CD player or tape recorder, television and video tapes/DVDs

• Storybooks
READING AND PHONICS

• Pictures and posters

• Phonic wall charts

• Graded reading scheme/s which include a variety of genres (plays, non-fiction, poetry etc.)

• Big books - some produced in Shared Writing sessions

• Enlarged texts such as poems, songs, rhymes, stories etc.

• Story books and picture books for the class library

• Short ‘fun’ books with 1-2 sentences on a page

• Grade appropriate non-fiction texts on a range of topics

• Flash card labels for classroom items and displays, high frequency words etc.

• Pointers to use when reading enlarged texts, wall stories, displays

• Picture and word puzzles and games

• Newspapers and magazines

• Wall charts showing simple maps, flow diagrams
WRITING AND HANDWRITING

• Writing materials (e.g. pencils, coloured pencils, wax crayons, blank paper in various sizes (A3, A4, A5), ruler, eraser,
 8.5mm lined jotters and exercise books

• Writing and sentence strips in joined script or cursive writing indicating starting points and writing direction

• Flipchart paper and thick Koki pens

• Personal dictionaries

• Simple grade appropriate dictionaries

 130 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
Glossary

This is an alphabetical list of key terms used in the Foundation Phase Home Language CAPS document.

antonym - a word that means the opposite of another word

assessment - a continuous planned process of gathering information, formally or informally, on child performance

assessment activity - an activity used to assess learners consisting of a number of sub-activities or parts

aurally - by means of listening/hearing

baseline assessment - initial assessment used to find out what children already know

browse - to look through a book without a particular purpose, just reading the interesting parts

caption - words printed or written below a picture explaining what it is about

closed questions - questions that require a specific answer. For example ‘Do you like coffee?’ The answer must
be ‘yes’ or ‘no’. ‘How old are you?’ The answer will be, e.g. ‘Ten’.

continuous assessment - ongoing assessment that forms part of teaching and supports learners’ literacy
development by providing ongoing feedback

cursive writing - handwriting that is carried out in a running hand, so that the letters are formed quickly without the
lifting of the pen or pencil.

blends, blending - an aspect of phonics in which children learn how to put together two or three letters to make a
sound. For example ‘spl’ in ‘split’.

cloze procedure - a technique in which words are deleted from a passage (e.g. every fifth word). The reader has to
use context clues to fill in the blanks. Cloze activities can be used to test comprehension and language mastery level

crossing the midline - actions which involve crossing over an invisible line running from head to toe down the middle
of one’s body, e.g., touching one’s opposite elbow or putting one foot over the other. Some experts believe that the
kind of co-ordination needed to do these activities is in important in early literacy. They believe that doing activities
that involve crossing the midline, provides an important foundation for literacy.

decoding - the ability to translate a word from print to speech, usually by using knowledge of sound-letter relationships;
also the act of deciphering a new word by sounding it out

emergent literacy - refers to children’s growing knowledge of the printed word. Children see print and begin to

understand its purpose. They learn about books and stories by being read to by adults or older children. They may
begin to try and write their names using their own ideas about spelling (invented spelling or emergent spelling) and
they may begin to pretend to read books. These behaviours all point to their growing literacy knowledge - emergent
literacy

fine motor skills - the coordination of small muscle movements, often involving the fingers and eyes, e.g., threading
a needle or using scissors to cut something out. Writing involves the use of fine motor skills.

CAPS 131
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
fantasy corner - a corner of the classroom where children can engage in imaginative play, e.g., dressing up in
different clothes, acting out different roles

free play - a time that allows children to choose where and how they will play and what they will play with

graded reading series - a series of readers divided in levels (e.g. Grade 1 - Level 1, 2 and 3). The levels go from
easiest (simple vocabulary, short sentences, short text) to more difficult. Each level has a number of readers in it. The
teacher assesses a learner and gets him/her started at the correct level. The learner reads several books at that level
until he/she can read fluently at that level. The learner then moves up a level.

graphic text - a text where information is presented visually. For example diagrams, graphs etc.

guided reading - a group reading session where children are all of the same instructional level and the teacher
scaffolds learning so that children increasingly take control

guided writing - involves individuals or small groups of children writing a range of text types after the teacher has
provided mini-lessons on aspects of writing such as format, punctuation, grammar or spelling

higher-order questions - questions that require children to bring together information from different parts of a text
(i.e. synthesise), to infer (i.e. read between the lines), to evaluate what happens (i.e. give an opinion) and/or to
appreciate a text (e.g. say whether one liked or disliked it and why)

high frequency words - a small group of common words (300 - 500) that appear often in English print. For example,
‘the’, ‘a’, ‘and’, ‘to’, ‘said’, ‘in’, ‘he’. The Dolch Word list and the Fry Word list are lists of high frequency words found
in primary school texts.

incidental learning - learning that happens without deliberate teaching

independent reading level - the level at which a reader can read text with 95% accuracy (i.e. no more than one error
per 20 words read). Independent reading level is fairly easy text for the reader.

instructional reading level - the level at which a reader can read text with 90% accuracy (i.e. no more than one
error per 10 words read). Instructional reading level is challenging but manageable. Texts at this level are used in
Guided Reading

invented spelling - an attempt to spell a word based on the learner’s current knowledge of letter-sound
relationships. For example, kt for cat).

jigsaw puzzle - a picture cut up into many pieces that one tries to fit together

joined script - a style of handwriting in which most letters in words are joined together to allow one to write quickly

kinaesthetic - kinaesthetic learning is learning which takes place through physical activity, i.e. learning by doing

lower-order questions - questions which require children to remember facts, e.g. Who were the main characters in
the story? What was the main character’s name? Where did she go to school?

meta-cognition - a learner’s awareness of his/her own thinking processes; the development of reading and writing
strategies depends on meta-cognition

onset - the part of a syllable before the first vowel (e.g. m -ap)

 132 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
open-ended questions - questions that can be answered in different ways; the learner has to answer the questions
in his or her own words. For example, Why do you think the boy ran away? What do you think he should have done?

perceptual - perceptual learning is learning through the senses such as sight and hearing; perceptual skills involve
using sight (visual skills) and hearing (auditory skills)

perceptual motor - perceptual motor skills involving co-ordinating sight and hearing with bodily action. For
example e handwriting involves co-ordinating one’s sight and the movement of one’s hands. Visual-motor
difficulties can lead to poor handwriting and copying skills and poor memory of what was written, due to the
extreme effort needed to write the information down.

phoneme - the separate sounds in a language (e.g. ‘t’, ‘th’, ‘k’, ‘sh’, ‘ai/ay’ are all phonemes in English). The word
‘meat’ has three phonemes. These are ‘m’, ‘ea’ and t’.

phonemic awareness - the ability to distinguish between the separate sounds of the language

phonics - the relationship between the sounds of a language and their spelling. Phonics is used in both reading and
writing.

phonological awareness - the ability to pay attention to the sounds of a language as distinct from its meaning

picture talk - talking about the pictures or illustrations in a book to make sense of them. For example ‘What are
Kagiso and her grandfather doing?’ ‘Yes, they’re bending down looking at something. What is it?’

plasticine - a soft, clay-like substance used by young children to make small models, shapes, etc.

publish - when learners publish their work, they make it public by sharing it, e.g. by handing it in to the teacher,
putting it on the class wall or notice board, or including it in a class anthology.

reading behaviours - exactly what readers do when they read in order to decode and make sense of text

rhyme - words or lines in a poem that end in the same sound including a vowel. For example the words ‘sad’, ‘mad’,
‘bad’, ‘glad’ all rhyme.

rime - the part of the syllable from the first vowel onwards (e.g. m-ap). It has the potential to rhyme.

shared reading - an activity in which children share the reading of an enlarged text with the teacher. This is a lesson
with the whole class. The text used is aimed at the top group in the class. Some children will be at a listening level,
others will be beginning to engage in the reading and more will be engaging fully. The same text is used over several
days. Each day a new focus is selected by the teacher. The text is used to introduce text features, phonics, grammar
and reading skills in context.

sight words - words that readers recognise automatically (on sight). There is no need to decode these words. In early
reading sight words are usually frequently occurring or ‘high frequency’ words such as ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘like’ and ‘were’.

story board - a series (or sequence) of pictures illustrating a story

spatial awareness - an awareness of objects in space around us, and awareness of our own body’s position in
space. With regard to literacy, this involves such things as directionality - left/right orientation; reading print from left
to right and top to bottom; forming the shapes of letters

CAPS 133
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3
strategy - strategies are ways that learners engage in thinking about reading, writing and oral language in order
to enhance learning and comprehension. Examples of reading comprehension strategies are prediction, making
connections, visualising, etc.

structural analysis - this involves analysing the parts of words such as prefixes and suffixesto recognise and
understand a word that is unfamiliar in print

synonym - a word with the same meaning as another word

syntax - the way words are arranged to form sentences or phrases, or the rules of grammar which control this

tangram - a Chinese puzzle consisting of a square divided into seven pieces that must be arranged to match
particular designs

teachable moment - a time at which a child is likely to be particularly interested and able to learn something, e.g.,
the time when a child receives birthday cards is one where a parent or teacher could help him/her to notice the
words and see that they say ‘Happy birthday!’

text talk - talking about a text to make sense of it, e.g., ‘Why do you think the boy left home?’ ‘I think he wanted a
better life.’ ‘Why do you think that?’ ‘Because he didn’t have money for shoes.’ ‘What do you think is going to happen
to him?’ etc.

tone - the way your voice sounds which shows how you are feeling

word attack skills - include phonics, structural analysis, and context clues or contextual analysis, used by a reader,
separately or in conjunction with each other to decode words not known on sight

word bank - a list of words that a learner knows or is in the process of learning; a personal dictionary (or vocabulary
book)

 134 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

CAPS 135
 ENGLISH HOME LANGUAGE GRADES R-3

 136 CURRICULUM AND ASSESSMENT POLICY STATEMENT (CAPS)